A NNUA L REPORT 2022

˜°°˛˜˝ ˆˇ˘ˆ 

Table of
Contents

14

Eight Lines of
Business
Our eight lines of
business

14

Retail Banking

16

Preferred Banking

18

Merrill

20

Private Bank

22

Business Banking

24

Global Commercial
Banking

26

Global Corporate &
Investment Banking

28

Global Markets

30

02

Company
Performance
A letter from Chair
and CEO Brian
Moynihan

02

Letter from Lead
Independent Director

11

Board of Directors
and Executive
Management Team

12

32

Local & Digital
Spotlights
Local Markets
Organization

32

Digital capabilities

34

36

Community Impact
Diverse entrepreneurs

36

Sustainable fnance

38

Jobs initiatives

39

Other highlights

40

42

Human Capital
Management Update
A letter from
Sheri Bronstein

42

Benefts overview

44

Talent & development

48

Diversity & inclusion

50

Employee
engagement &
workforce metrics

54

58

Miscellaneous &
Appendix
Financial highlights

58

Recognition

59

Stakeholder
Capitalism Metrics

60

2022 Financial
Review

71

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 1

Company
Performance

A letter from
Chair and CEO
Brian Moynihan
To our shareholders,
Our company adopted Responsible Growth in 2014,
and fully discussed its core tenets in our Annual Report
the following year. These tenets have served as the
foundation for our strong performance and progress.
We have seen Responsible Growth work in the relative
calm of 2015 to 2019, the pandemic tumult of 2020
and 2021, and the infationary period of 2022. In each
of these periods, our company benefted from our
long-term consistency and adherence to the tenets
of Responsible Growth.
Responsible Growth has served us well under
varied conditions
The core tenets of Responsible Growth have served our
company and you, our shareholders, well during good
times and stress.
Responsible Growth served us well through the period
from 2015 to 2019, when the economies of the
world settled into normalized growth rates and interest
rates rose in the U.S. with the Federal Reserve’s
tightening cycle.
As the pandemic hit in early 2020, a major economic
crisis ensued and your company performed well once
again, even as we met our clients’ borrowing demands,
built reserves, traded through uncertain markets, and
helped our employees, clients and our communities deal
with the pandemic and its afermath. Again, Responsible
Growth served us well.
During 2022, the U.S. and the world continued to face
civil tensions from the pandemic and lockdowns, social
and racial conficts, a war in Europe and energy supply
disruptions, and infation.

Responsible Growth
1. Win in the market, no excuses.
2. Grow with a customer-focused strategy.
3. Grow with the right risk principles.

2 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

4. Grow in a sustainable manner: Be the best
place to work, share our success with our
communities and drive Operational Excellence.

The strength of our balance sheet, risk management, organic
growth, and expense management became a catalyst that drove
our fnancial performance.
Let’s take a look at highlights of our performance in each of these
periods, beginning with 2015 to 2019 as the U.S. economy set
a record for one of the longest periods of economic growth. The
Federal Reserve started a tightening cycle in 2016, raising interest
rates refecting the strength of the U.S. economy. Here’s how we did:
Loans
Deposits
Net interest income
Expenses
Net charge-oﬀs
Earnings
Headcount
Number of shares
Book value per share
Active digital customers
Customer satisfaction
Employee satisfaction

YE 2015
$897 B
$1.2 T
$39.0 B
$57.6 B
$ 4.3 B
$15.9 B
216 K
10.4 B
$22.53
32 MM
74%
76%*

YE 2019
$983 B
$1.4 T
$49.0 B
$54.9 B
$ 3.6 B
$27.4 B
208 K
8.8 B
$27.32
38 MM
85%
85%

% change
10%
20%
25%
-5%
-16%
72%
-4%
-15%
21%
21%
15%
12%

Then came the pandemic, which brought with it 15% U.S.
unemployment, a 30% drop in U.S. GDP annualized growth rate,
huge fscal stimuli, supply chain disruptions, and an instantaneous
drop to 0% rates. Afer the recovery was assured by early 2021,
a period of infation set in resulting in the steepest interest
rate increase path we have seen in the U.S. in the past 40 years.
Here is how the company performed from 2019 to 2022:
Loans
Deposits
Net interest income
Expenses
Net charge-oﬀs
Earnings
Headcount
Number of shares
Book value per share
Active digital customers
Customer satisfaction
Employee satisfaction

YE 2019
$983 B
$1.4 T
$49.0 B
$54.9 B
$3.6 B
$27.4 B
208 K
8.8 B
$27.32
38 MM
85%
85%

YE 2022
$1.0 T
$1.9 T
$52.5 B
$61.4 B
$2.2 B
$27.5 B
217 K
8.0 B
$30.61
44 MM
87%
85%

% change
6%
35%
7%
12%
-40%
0%
4%
-9%
12%
15%
2%
0%

As a side note, the total cumulative charge-ofs at Bank of
America from 2015 to 2022, refecting Responsible Growth,
were less than the charge-ofs recorded in the single year
2010 despite a recession, a pandemic, unprecedented monetary
policy changes, and war occurring in these years.

We are positioned well for the
future. In the post-pandemic period
we have reestablished our organic
growth engine.
For the entirety of the period from 2015 to 2022, we have seen
the stock price double; we have produced $185 billion in afer-tax
earnings; and we have invested heavily in our franchise to better
serve our customers and clients. Responsible Growth worked
in all those environments and produced strong results on an
enormous scale.
A simple way to think about this is only four U.S. companies have
earned more than $15 billion in GAAP afer-tax income in each of
these eight years. Your company is one of them.
More importantly, we are positioned well for the future. In the
post-pandemic period we have reestablished our organic growth
engine. We have delivered revenue growth, while controlling
expense, in a highly volatile environment. You will note increased
costs for 2019 to 2022 above. First, we had cost increases for
special pandemic programs and to take care of our team. Then,
infation added to costs. But in the end, we have just delivered
our sixth straight quarter of operating leverage in the fourth
quarter of 2022.
We have strong credit quality, capital ratios in excess of
constantly increased regulatory minimums, a highly-respected
brand, high employee satisfaction and loyalty, and incredible
customers we are honored to serve. We have built and improved
upon digital capabilities across every line of business to serve
these customers, which embed the most efective capabilities
of a fntech into the strength and stability of a well-regulated
company.
While we review and learn from the past, we don’t live there.
What we are excited about is how our proven operating model
sets us up for the future. Our team relishes the work ahead to
continue to deliver for you. So, as we look forward to the years
ahead, we are poised to continue to drive Responsible Growth,
no matter what comes at us.

8 consecutive years of more than $15B in net income
($ Billions)
$28.1
$15.9

$17.8

$18.2

2015

2016

2017

$32.0
$27.4

$27.5
$17.9

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

*2014 Employee Engagement Index Score; survey was not conducted in 2015
Source: FactSet and SNL Financial. Reflects calendar year net income.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 3

company performance

Thank you to our Team and our Directors
Before I share more highlights of our results in 2022, I want to
thank my Management Team and our Board of Directors for
continuing to represent the needs of our clients, teammates,
shareholders, and the communities we serve. You will see more
about these leaders on pages 12 and 13.
I especially want to recognize Lead Independent Director Lionel
Nowell, who was named as “Independent Director of the Year” by
Corporate Board Member magazine. Lionel shares his perspective
on our company on page 11.
We welcomed José (Joe) E. Almeida, who joined your Board in
September. We also give our appreciation to David Yost, a director
since 2012, who is retiring due to age guidelines and will not
stand for reelection at our annual shareholders’ meeting. We thank
Dave for his leadership, oversight, and prudent stewardship.
Thank you as well to my 217,000 teammates who join me every day
at our company to fulfll our purpose of making fnancial lives better.
In a year that began with many of us once again working from home,
we are pleased to have our teammates back together, collaborating
in person to serve our clients and deliver the full breadth of our
capabilities, as you’ll see highlighted throughout this Annual Report.
A deeper look at 2022
In 2022, we earned $27.5 billion afer-tax, a decline from our
record-level earnings in 2021, primarily due to increases in credit
costs due to the absence of reserve releases. We earned $3.19 per
diluted share, on $95 billion in revenue. Our pre-tax, pre-provision
income, which adjusts for the provision expense, was up 14%*
from 2021, driven by organic growth across our lines of business,
higher interest rates, and prudent management of expenses. This
helped us achieve operating leverage in 2022.
Total assets declined slightly to $3.05 trillion driven by a decrease
in deposits due to withdrawal of monetary accommodation. These
deposits remain at a healthy $1.9 trillion level. Deposits in the
banking industry are shrinking, the natural and intended outcome
of the Federal Reserve’s monetary actions to fght infation.
At the same time, even as the economy weakened during 2022,
loan demand increased as loans grew $67 billion to more than
$1.04 trillion. Asset quality remained strong as net charge-ofs
remained near the historically low range experienced in 2021.
Overall, our balance sheet continued to be supported by high
levels of capital and liquidity, enabling us to continue to grow our
business with customers, while meeting additional regulatory
requirements, and repurchasing shares.
Rising infation also took its toll on the equities market. For the
year, our stock price decreased 24%, directionally in line with the
S&P 500 and the broader bank index.

This followed a strong 2021 performance that saw our stock
outperform and increase 47%. Book value per share and tangible
book value per share both increased in 2022.
We also addressed increased regulatory changes in our capital
requirements. Our common equity tier 1 capital (CET1) grew 5%
in 2022 to more than $180 billion, and our CET1 ratio of 11.2%
remained well above our new minimum requirements. Even while
growing capital, our common dividend per share increased 10%
from 2021 and, in the aggregate, in 2022 we returned $13.6 billion
in capital to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases.
Our frst use of our capital generation is to grow our company by
supporting our customers’ needs and pay our dividend. But in the
end, we end up with more than we need for those purposes. Share
repurchases allow long-term holders to own more of our company.
In addition, we continued investments to enhance being a Great
Place to Work for teammates. We established a multi-faceted
approach to workplace fexibility, provided free lunch for several
months to help employees create informal connections and
welcome them back fully to work, and continued our competitive
pay packages to reward our employees for serving our clients and
targeted our eforts at building long careers at Bank of America.
For our communities and the broader needs of society, we also remain
attentive to areas where we can direct the talent, innovation, and
resources of our company and its role in capitalism. For example, we
are working alongside our clients toward a clean energy, sustainable
future. This is also why we invest in partners and programs in our
local markets: to help create economic opportunity and prosperity in
underserved communities where the needs can be greatest.

Euromoney named Bank of America
the World’s Best Bank for the second
time in fve years. We’re also pleased
to be named America’s most “JUST”
Company by JUST Capital.
For all of this and more, Euromoney named Bank of America the
World’s Best Bank for the second time in fve years. In announcing
this prestigious ranking, the publication stated: “In an increasingly
volatile and uncertain environment, Euromoney recognized Bank
of America’s performance not only in retail banking, loan growth,
capital markets trading and wealth management, but also its
behavior as a corporate citizen.”
We’re also pleased to be named as America’s Most “JUST”
Company by JUST Capital. This ranking evaluates how companies
invest in employees, communities, and customers, along with other
issues JUST Capital has identifed as important to Americans today.

*Pre-tax, pre-provision income is a non-GAAP financial measure calculated by adjusting consolidated pre-tax income to add back provision for credit loss. For
2022 and 2021, reported pre-tax income was $31.0 billion and $34.0 billion, and reported provision (benefit) for credit losses was $2.5 billion and $(4.6) billion,
resulting in pre-tax, pre-provision income of $33.5 billion and $29.4 billion.

4 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

I am proud of all that your company, and our team, achieved in
2022. We once again delivered both profts and purpose — the
genius of the AND as we call it — and we did it by delivering on
the tenets of Responsible Growth. Throughout this letter, I will
share with you examples about how we executed against each.
The rest of this report discusses that work in greater detail, and
we also make available a clear set of fnancial and non-fnancial
disclosures so you can see for yourself how we measure our
progress and determine where we have more work to do.
We are capitalists at Bank of America
At the core of the progress is our conviction that capitalism is
embedded in how Responsible Growth delivers opportunity for our
clients, our teammates, the communities we serve, and for you,
our shareholders. I’ve sometimes been surprised to be asked —
including at Congressional hearings — “Are you a capitalist?” Your
company is one of the most proftable companies in the world,
whose purpose is to help our customers and clients live their
fnancial lives, efectively helping them beneft in the capitalist
system. Therefore, you might also fnd the question unusual. Of
course, I answered, “Yes.”
But I understand the thoughts behind the question. I think the
questions and the concerns some may have about capitalism are
about opportunity. About whether companies are sharing profts
or paying people fairly and equitably. At Bank of America, we look
at it in this straightforward way: How can we rely on and help
the innovation and energy of capitalism to address the priorities
of our communities and society AND beneft our shareholders?
Capitalism provides the money, the creativity, and the expertise
to solve the needs of society. We enable our customers to drive
capitalism. It is what we do.

$27.5B
net income

$3T

balance sheet

We once again delivered both
profts and purpose — the genius
of the AND as we call it — and we
did it by delivering on the tenets of
Responsible Growth.
Throughout this report we provide details about how we do this:
How we help transmit the economy by lending, investing, and
working alongside our clients to help them succeed. About all we
do to support our teammates and be a Great Place to Work for
them. The many ways we partner in local markets to help support
community priorities. And, at the same time, How we deliver for
you, our shareholders.
All these activities refect our view that capitalism creates
opportunity — for our customers and clients at every stage of
their progress; for our teammates to advance their careers at
Bank of America and support their families; for those in our local
communities who may need help accessing our economic system
to achieve their own goals; and for our millions of investors, a
chance to share in our success through their ownership.
To do this, we align our day-to-day business activities to the work.
We bring our $3 trillion balance sheet to the task. We bring our
$273 billion in equity. We bring our capital markets and lending
capabilities, raising trillions for our clients. We bring the invested
assets of our wealth management clients. Of course, we also
bring the nearly $360 million of philanthropy we commit. That is
how we think of it: capitalism creates opportunity and prosperity,
addressing important societal challenges along the way. And we
measure our success. See below for how we measure.

$273B
equity

~$360M
in philanthropy

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 5

company performance

Delivering Responsible Growth in 2022
Let’s look at how we executed against each of the four tenets of
Responsible Growth in 2022.
Grow and win in the market, no excuses. In 2022, we
acquired new clients and deepened our relationships with existing
ones. The strongest underlying evidence of winning in the
marketplace is through market share, as illustrated by organic
growth activity with our clients.
We drive Responsible Growth through our eight lines of business.
Our client teams deliver the unique capabilities and oferings of
each business to each client. We also focus in each market on
bringing the entire company to every customer or client. We track
how well we deliver these integrated capabilities by the number of
client referrals between our lines of business in our local markets.
In 2022, we saw more than 7.5 million total referrals among
our operating units. I want to thank our 97 market presidents
across the U.S. and the nearly 30 country executives around the
globe who serve as chief executive for Bank of America in their
markets. They lead an integrated team to help us deliver one
company for clients, teammates, you, our shareholders, and the
broader communities served by your company. In this report on
page 32, you will see how that comes to life in just one of these
communities through our local leadership.

In 2022, we saw more than
7.5 million total referrals among
our operating units.
In 2022, we helped consumer clients to open a record one million
net new checking accounts. We also opened 465,000 Consumer

6 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Investment accounts through our online investment platform,
Merrill Edge, resulting in $28 billion in net client fows. And we
added more than a million new consumer credit card accounts
in three of the four quarters in 2022.
Preferred Rewards — our fagship loyalty program that
recognizes and rewards clients for doing business with us across
all products — recorded another strong year of growth, with
10.2 million total clients enrolled. This represents a 9% year-overyear increase, with the program retaining its best-in-class 99%
annualized membership retention rate.
Small business owners benefted from Bank of America’s products,
scale and expertise at our retail fnancial centers across the U.S. —
including Business Advantage specialists in more than 2,600 fnancial
centers, as well as our expansive ATM network, and access to local
client professionals available to discuss their business priorities. We
also are available to serve our small business clients digitally with the
latest videoconferencing, chat and phone technology. Thanks to all
of this and more, we continue to maintain our position among the
nation’s largest small business lenders, ending 2022 with $36 billion
in total outstanding loans under $1 million and a 5% increase in
Small Business checking accounts. And these small business clients
have entrusted us with managing approximately $175 billion of
deposits to pay their employees and build their businesses.
Our Merchant Services platform also recorded a strong year
supporting fnancial solutions for merchants, adding new clients and
volume while achieving a #1 client experience rating from J.D. Power.
Our wealth management business is comprised of Merrill and The
Private Bank, which supported clients through last year’s turbulent
markets. The business added nearly 28,000 net new relationships
as well as more than 800 wealth advisors in the second half of
the year. This aided in gathering $87 billion in client fows for

wealth management clients. Together, the team helped clients
open more than 119,000 new bank accounts in 2022. And we saw
average loan and lease growth of 10% year-over-year — the 51st
consecutive quarter of growth as we continue to deliver our full
suite of products and services in a way that sets us apart from
competitors and meets client needs.
In our Global Banking business, serving commercial and corporate
clients, we added more than 1,110 clients to the company in
2022 and grew average loans and leases 14% year-over-year to
$375 billion. We also delivered $10.4 billion in Global Transaction
Services revenue, up 38% over 2021. We moved up to #3 in the
investment banking fees market share worldwide.
Our Global Markets business once again had a very strong year
despite market volatility. The team grew year-over-year sales and
trading revenue by 9%, and had the highest full-year tally since
2010. This included investment in our macro trading business,
which had revenues that were up 38% for the year. Overall Global
Markets average trading-related assets were up 9% and average
loans of $117 billion increased 28%.

Responsible Growth means growing
with a focus on the customer — and
that means that our products and
services must evolve in line with our
clients’ unique fnancial needs.
Grow with a customer focus. Responsible Growth means
growing with a focus on our customers and clients — and that
means that our products and services must evolve in line with
our clients’ unique fnancial needs. Consumer customers continue
to tell us they value our digital capabilities. In 2022, your company:
• Added three million active digital banking users, improving upon
a record performance in 2021
• Had 56 million verifed users with 44 million active and engaged
in the past 90 days
• Experienced 11.6 billion digital logins
• Grew digital sales 22%, representing nearly 50% of overall
consumer sales
Erica®, our artifcial intelligence (AI)-based virtual fnancial assistant,
also continues to attract increased client engagement as it has
proven to be a critical channel to help us deliver important information
to clients and address their questions and concerns in real-time. Erica
handled roughly 145 million interactions in the fourth quarter and
recently passed a billion interactions since its introduction.
Among the most signifcant digital-driven changes in banking is how
our clients want to send and receive money. In the fourth quarter
of 2022, the number of consumer clients who are active Zelle®

users increased 15% to 18.2 million. These active users sent and
received 273 million transfers worth $81 billion, up 25% and 24%
year-over-year, respectively. Zelle-sent transactions exceed checks
written by our consumers. This shows our customers’ preference
for digital convenience. This allows us to see strong customer scores
and loyalty, while reducing our costs of operation in our consumer
business as a percentage of deposits to 117 basis points.
Our wealth clients also expect digital innovation, and we are
providing it. For example:
• In the fourth quarter of 2022, Erica interactions in the Merrill
Wealth Management business increased 23% and Zelle
transactions by Private Bank clients increased 39%.
• Merrill clients are 82% digitally active while our Private Bank
clients are now 86% digitally active — new highs for both.
• Digital check deposit rates for Merrill and Private Bank clients
stand at 75% and 76%, respectively.
• Merrill now has 77% of households enrolled in eDelivery, with
223,000 planning reports generated — up 26% from the end of
the previous year.
• Merrill Lynch advisors sent 1.4 million secure messages to our
clients in the fourth quarter of 2022 alone.
Our commercial clients also continue to adopt our easy-to-use
CashPro app, and along with that use, we’re seeing an increasing
percentage of credit documents uploaded digitally, saving clients
time. As of late 2022, 75% of clients are digitally active on the
CashPro and BA360 platforms across commercial, corporate, and
business banking. The fourth quarter of 2022 saw record quarterly
CashPro App engagement, with active users increasing 25% and
sign-ins increasing 50%, in turn driving a record 40% increase in
quarterly CashPro App payment approvals with a value of $186
billion. We know we can increase these award-wining capabilities
even more, driven by client demand.

56M

verifed digital
users in 2022

11.6B

digital logins
in 2022

The case for continued development of our digital platforms
is simple: clients tell us they clearly appreciate the value
and convenience it provides — so we will continue to provide
and expand it.
We continue to take the steps necessary to fully digitally enable
all products to drive growth and maximize the client experience.
That’s why we invested $3.6 billion in 2022 for new technology
initiatives, to build a powerful, more secure, and scalable
technology platform with market-leading capabilities. That sum
is up from 2021 and is expected to be higher again in 2023.
And through continuous investment we have spent more than
$30 billion over the past decade on new technology initiatives.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 7

company performance

This work beneftted from the important insights and guidance
from our National Community Advisory Council (NCAC), a group
of external advisors, analysts, and consumer advocates that we
established 17 years ago. The NCAC provides important external
perspective to help us understand, design, and deliver products
to help meet the needs of our communities — particularly those
in the low- to moderate-income sphere.

At the same time, we also continued to focus on delivering
expert support and guidance across our high-touch physical
network, opening 58 new fnancial centers, and renovating 784
more in 2022. We ended the year with 3,900 fnancial centers
and 15,500 ATMs. This network also includes our phone, ofces,
and chat capabilities. We are pleased by the results in our new
markets, where we are growing from no fnancial centers there
to become top 10 or above in deposit market share in just a
few years.
Together, our combined high-tech and high-touch approach to
serving clients has led to record-high levels of customer satisfaction
for Bank of America in 2022 and, in turn, contributed to our growth.
Simply put, more satisfed clients do more business with us.
Another recent example of our customer-focus is the continued
evolution of our overdraf services and solutions — work that had
been underway for more than a dozen years to reduce clients’
reliance on overdrafs and provide alternatives to help clients
manage their deposit accounts and avoid fees. You can see in our
Retail Banking update on page 16 that these fees are down over
90% from 2009.
We believe that these fees are not sustainable for a good customer
relationship, and by eliminating them we are able to increase
satisfaction and deepen relationships to create a more stable
source of revenues, while reducing costs for our company.

Grow within our risk framework. The third tenet of
Responsible Growth is to grow within our well-managed risk
framework — a framework that allowed us to be a source of
strength to clients during the health crisis and that has continued
to allow us to grow during the current volatile market environment.
Our discipline around risk has us well-prepared for a severe
economic stress scenario, as illustrated by Bank of America having
the lowest stressed credit loss rates among major banks in nine
out of the past 10 CCAR exams conducted by the Federal Reserve
Board. As we cited earlier, credit quality continues to be better
than 2019, which was the last year before the pandemic and
represented a very strong year for credit at banks.
In addition to being efective, our risk management is also
agile — when regulatory capital ratio requirements for banks
changed with little advance notice in 2022, we made moves so
that we had a bufer to those requirements quickly. Importantly,
we did that as we continued to support clients, return capital to
shareholders, and strengthen our strong balance sheet.

Continued quarterly operating leverage¹ streak in 2022
29%

22%

3Q19-2Q21
Break in operating
leverage streak

21%

12%
8%

8%
5%

3%

1Q
15

2Q

3Q

4Q

8%
6%

6%

4%

3%

1Q
16

2Q

7% 7%
5%

4%

6%
4%

4%
2%

3Q

4Q

1Q
17

2Q

3Q

4Q

1Q
18

2Q

3Q

4Q

1Q
19

2Q

3%

4%
2%

3Q
21

4Q

1Q
22

2Q

3Q

4Q

Note: Amounts may not total due to rounding.
1

Operating leverage is calculated as the year-over-year percentage change in revenue, net of interest expense, less the percentage change in noninterest expense.

8 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Grow in a sustainable manner. Responsible Growth requires
us to grow in a sustainable manner. This has three components.
First, we drive Operational Excellence (OpEx). This allows us to
create savings, which we can then reinvest — in our capabilities,
our teammates, our communities and in capital returns to
shareholders. Second, we want to be a Great Place to Work for our
teammates. This provides us a competitive edge to attract the
best new teammates to serve our clients and retain them once
they’ve joined the team. Third, we share our success so we can
support the communities in which we work and live and help to
address the biggest challenges facing communities today.
Driving Operational Excellence. OpEx is how we create the
means to reduce costs by striving to eliminate inefciencies in our
processes across our platform and reinvest savings into the things
that are important to us: our team, our capabilities, our client
experience, our communities, and our shareholders.
By pursuing OpEx, we drive continuous improvement, reduce risk,
and identify faster, simpler, and more efcient ways of working
and serving our clients.
In 2022, our fourth quarter operating leverage was 6%. Simply put,
operating leverage is the percentage growth in revenue minus the
percent growth in expenses. By looking for continuous process
improvements and savings through OpEx, we have delivered
operating leverage for the past six consecutive quarters — picking
back up on the 18-quarter streak we had developed prior to the
pandemic-driven economic slowdown.
In Retail Banking, OpEx and a more digitized customer base helped
pay for investments that allowed us to improve that business’s
efciency ratio to 47% in the most recent quarter, an impressive
600 basis point improvement over the year-ago fourth quarter.
Across the company, we have implemented more than 12,000
employee-sourced suggestions since 2014 to simplify our work and
create greater efciency. In addition to making it easier to serve
our clients, these ideas have resulted in nearly $5 billion in expense
savings and 13 million hours of capacity saved. Whatever challenges
the future may hold, your company’s focus on OpEx will help deliver
for clients while investing in the future of our people, communities
and driving great returns to you, our shareholders. In 2022, our
expenses were $61 billion, which is more than $10 billion lower than
a decade ago.

Central to driving Responsible
Growth is being a Great Place to
Work for our teammates. In 2022,
we continued this long-standing
commitment.

Making our company a Great Place to Work. Central to
driving Responsible Growth is being a Great Place to Work
for our teammates. In 2022, we continued this long-standing
commitment, including delivering a range of some of the best
benefts in corporate America, supporting the development of our
employees, and maintaining a workplace where every individual
can thrive.
Our goal continues to be a company where people want to
work today and build a career. The reward for our shareholders
is lower turnover costs. You can read more about how we are
investing in teammates in our Human Capital Management
update on pages 42–57.

~$46K

minimum wage for full-time
employees per year

Highlights include:
• We increased our U.S. minimum hourly wage to $22 in our next
step toward $25 by 2025. This means that any employee who
works full-time for our company makes at least ~$46,000 per year
as well as some of the most comprehensive benefts available.
• In addition to normal merit, we delivered a mid-year increase to
annual base salaries for all U.S. employees who currently receive
annual total compensation below $100,000 and have been
employed with the company since 2021 or earlier. The percentage
increase for eligible employees ranged from 3% to 7%, increasing
with years of service.
• In recognition of the important achievements made by our
employees in 2022, our Management Team, Board of Directors
and I once again recognized teammates with our Sharing Success
compensation award. This is the sixth time teammates will receive
this award, totaling more than $4 billion since its inception.
Approximately 96% of our teammates received an award this year,
with the vast majority receiving it in the form of Bank of America
stock to help them share in our long-term success.
• We also launched a new sabbatical program for employees
celebrating milestones of 15 years or more beginning in 2023,
and doubled the number of confdential, face-to-face counseling
sessions available through our Employee Assistance Program.
• We increased our childcare benefts, which provide eligible
employees making less than $100,000 per year a reimbursement
of up to $275 a month per child for the cost of childcare.
• We also continued to have no, or below our cost, increases in
health benefts for most of our teammates to help them care for
their families.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 9

company performance

We continue to recruit, develop, and retain a diverse and inclusive
workplace. We know that when our workforce refects the
communities we serve, we can better serve our clients while also
creating an environment where people want to perform their
best. Our diversity and inclusion (D&I) policies drive transparency,
accountability, and continued progress while encouraging all
teammates to bring their full and authentic selves to work each
day. Third parties validate our equal pay for equal work eforts,
and we continue to survey our teammates annually on how we are
doing in the D&I space. As in recent years, the 2022 employee
survey D&I index scores remained high.
Sharing our success. At Bank of America, sharing success
includes giving and volunteering, as well as helping to address
issues afecting clients and communities. When our communities
fare well, we fare well, and our brand refects it.
In 2022, we made nearly $360 million in philanthropic investments
to strengthen our communities. Our teammates also donated
money, as well as their time, to share success. Charitable giving by
our teammates in 2022, combined with matching gifs from Bank
of America, totaled more than $65 million. Our teammates also
reported nearly two million volunteer hours for the year. I am proud to
share this proof of their commitment to our communities with you.
To help support health and safety, and address food insecurity in
our local markets, we ran two campaigns to encourage employees
to get vaccinated and/or boosted against COVID-19 and the fu,
donating to hunger relief organizations for each employee who
took those actions. Combined, the campaigns donated more
than $18 million for hunger organizations across the country.
Since 2015 we have donated nearly $184 million toward hunger
relief eforts.
We also create opportunity in our communities through
employment. We are in our second commitment to hire 10,000
teammates from low- and moderate-income communities,
having completed the frst in three years versus the fve pledged.
Similarly, to recognize our service men and women, we have
hired over 15,000 veterans in the last eight years. We work
with other companies to expand the principles of skills-based
hiring to large companies. This gives an employee a great
start with great benefts.
10 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

We continue to help drive sustainability through our work with
clients to help them transition to a secure, low-carbon economy. We
are committed to helping facilitate that just energy transition, with
clean energy that is afordable, sustainable and secure. That’s why
in 2020 we set a goal to mobilize and deploy $1.5 trillion by 2030
to advance the sustainable development goals (SDGs) 193 countries
agreed to in 2015, with $1 trillion of that focused on helping our
clients transition to a low-carbon future. From 2021 through 2022,
we mobilized and deployed a cumulative total of $410 billion in
sustainable fnance, with more than $235 billion of that focused
on helping drive afordable clean energy and related priorities. At
the same time, we are helping catalyze eforts globally by playing a
lead role in multiple global organizations to give private companies
from all sectors the opportunity to exchange ideas and consider
transactions and investments that can help accelerate the transition.
Our approach to sustainable fnance is to help our clients make the
transition they seek. It is great business and great for society. For
more, see page 38.
We issued our third Equality Progress Sustainability Bond for
$2 billion. The use of proceeds from the bond ofering is designed
to advance racial and gender equality, economic opportunity, and
environmental sustainability.
We also created additional opportunity for diverse and women
entrepreneurs and business owners.
Over the last few years, we have invested in 23 minority depository
institutions. We also have helped seed more than 130 private equity
funds run by women and diverse private equity entrepreneurs.
These private equity funds have funded more than 1,000 operating
companies owned by like cohorts. We also recognize the value to
our business — and to society — of supply chain diversity. In 2022,
approximately $2 billion of our nearly $19 billion in annual spend
was with diverse suppliers. You can read more about how we are
investing in diverse entrepreneurs on page 36.
Measuring our positive impact at home and around the
world — how capitalism delivers
I was asked by a teammate with a college-age daughter how we
might be more convincing that capitalism is doing what society
wants from it. My response: We don’t leave it to interpretation,
we disclose what we do for all to see. What we show in the
metrics in this report is the progress we are making as well as the
alignment to what society wants from capitalism — to produce
profts and purpose. That perpetual motion machine of capitalism
can continuously invest in progress on the goals described
below. Charity is wonderful, but it doesn’t provide enough money.
Governments are large spenders, but they are short on cash and
run huge defcits, so they really don’t have the money to drive
sustained progress. Government policies shif and therefore
long-term change is hard to achieve. Companies around the world,
when aligned to the tasks generate activity that dwarfs the eforts
of other sectors. It is sustained by the profts, which draw more
capital. So the straightforward answer to the teammate was — if
we want to be successful at what society wants, we should all
cheer capitalism on.

However, it is important to measure progress to prove capitalism
is working. In the U.S. and globally, companies can track their
performance in areas that include equality of opportunity,
afordable housing, prosperity, access to clean water, sustainable,
clean, secure energy, and other priorities.

expressing diferent views on what is the right disclosure or action.
We encourage you to review our SCMs and all the other disclosures
we reference in this Annual Report and proxy statement. We don’t
need to spend more of your money on inconsistent and redundant
standards; we need to keep driving our performance.

We do so through reporting a set of universal Stakeholder Capitalism
Metrics (SCM). The SCMs span the breadth of global industry, giving
a consistent framework to measure and disclose how companies
are addressing societal priorities and the SDGs through their
business activities and operations. Nearly 200 companies around
the world have committed to reporting SCMs — and about 140
have already begun to do so. The metrics were developed with the
expertise of the global Big Four accounting frms.

The last year has underscored once again that change is constant
in our world. A successful company must be able to operate in any
environment. And I am proud to say your company has done that,
despite the volatility and uncertainty in the economy.

You can fnd our 2022 Stakeholder Capitalism Metrics on page 60.
This is the third consecutive year we have published these metrics
in our Annual Report, in addition to our fnancial disclosures. We
believe this provides the most relevant, useful and transparent
information. This disclosure is comprehensive and straightforward,
allowing you, our shareholders, to assess your company. Many
observers express diferent views on disclosures; for example, there
are multiple shareholder proposals in our proxy statement, each

Responsible Growth has worked, again.
On behalf of my teammates, our Management Team and the Board
of Directors, I thank you for your support of Bank of America.

Brian Moynihan
March 1, 2023

Letter from our
Lead Independent Director
It is an honor to serve as your Board’s Lead Independent Director
and work alongside my fellow directors to provide diverse and
independent perspectives that help create long-term sustainable
value for our shareholders and stakeholders.
In partnership with Brian and the talented men and women of
the Management Team, we have led the company with a
common focus on driving Responsible Growth.
Bank of America’s focus on Responsible Growth is delivering
results for you and helping us succeed through changing markets,
as we continue to diligently serve our clients and help them
achieve their short- and long-term fnancial goals.
This Annual Report and the 2022 Proxy Statement are full of
examples illustrating how our focus on Responsible Growth
continues to provide Bank of America with the ability to deliver
strong returns today, and the resilience to consistently serve our
stakeholders in the future.

and planning process to provide additional oversight of Bank of
America’s strategic execution. Board members also oversee other
key areas, such as Bank of America’s enterprise risk management,
human capital development, and external initiatives developed to
strengthen the communities we serve around the world.
To help fulfll our duties and responsibilities, I and each member
of the Board regularly stay informed of opportunities and
challenges in the markets, the economy and the world that
could impact Bank of America. We also engage on a year-round
basis with our shareholders to listen to your thoughts and
perspectives. We encourage your views and inputs because they
provide valuable insights that help ensure your voice is an integral
part of our ongoing discussions and governance of the company.
Thank you for choosing to invest in Bank of America. We
remain committed to delivering for you, as well as our clients,
teammates, and communities.
Sincerely,

In support of this endeavor, your Board conducts ongoing,
fulsome discussions with the company’s senior Management
Team — and each other — to ensure Bank of America’s strategic
alignment to Responsible Growth. This includes meeting with
the Management Team to review and approve the company’s
strategy, and conducting a year-round strategic assessment

Lionel Nowell III
March 1, 2023
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 11

board of directors and eXecutive management team

company performance

Board of Directors
Brian T.
Moynihan

Lionel L.
Nowell III

Chair of the Board and
Chief Executive Oﬃcer

Lead Independent
Director

José (Joe)
E. Almeida

Frank P.
Bramble, Sr.

Pierre J. P.
de Weck

Linda P. Hudson

Monica C.
Lozano

Denise L.
Ramos

Clayton S. Rose

Michael D.
White

Thomas D.
Woods

R. David Yost

Maria T. Zuber

Arnold W.
Donald

Sharon L. Allen

Our Board of Directors sets the tone at the top by overseeing our corporate
strategy. In addition, the heads of our eight lines of business as well as
key leadership for International and our institutional client base make up
our Executive Management Team.
12 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Executive Management Team
Brian T.
Moynihan

Raul A. Anaya

Dean C.
Athanasia

Chair of the Board and
Chief Executive Oﬃcer

President, Business
Banking

President, Regional
Banking

Catherine P.
Bessant

Aditya Bhasin

D. Steve Boland

Vice Chair, Global
Strategy

Chief Technology and
Information Oﬃcer

Chief Administrative
Oﬃcer

Alastair M.
Borthwick

Sheri B.
Bronstein

James P. DeMare

Chief Financial Oﬃcer

Chief Human Resources
Oﬃcer

President, Global
Markets

Paul M.
Donofrio

Geoﬀrey S.
Greener

Christine P.
Katziﬀ

Vice Chair

Chief Risk Oﬃcer

Chief Audit Executive

Kathleen A.
Knox

Matthew M.
Koder

Aron D. Levine

President, The Private
Bank

President, Global
Corporate & Investment
Banking

President, Preferred
Banking

Bernard A.
Mensah

Lauren
Mogensen

Thong M.
Nguyen

President, International;
CEO, Merrill Lynch
International

Global General Counsel

Vice Chair, Head of Global
Strategy & Enterprise
Platforms

Tom M.
Scrivener

Andrew M. Sieg

President, Retail Banking

Chief Operations
Executive

President, Merrill Wealth
Management

Wendy H.
Stewart

Bruce R.
Thompson

President, Global
Commercial Banking

Vice Chair, Head of
Enterprise Credit

Holly O’Neill

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 13

Eight Lines
of Business

Going to market
through our eight
lines of business
By delivering capabilities
through eight lines of business,
we provide a unique advantage
to each customer and client: the
powerful expertise of one team,
working together to deliver
on our purpose to help make
fnancial lives better through our
focus on Responsible Growth.
CONSUMER BANKING
RETAIL BANKING
Serves mass market U.S. consumers with a full range of
fnancial products and services through award-winning
digital banking capabilities and fnancial center network.
This business is led by Holly O’Neill.
Retail Banking is part of the Consumer Banking segment
reporting to Dean Athanasia, president of
Regional Banking.
PREFERRED BANKING
Provides personalized solutions, valuable rewards,
and advice and guidance for clients with more
complex banking, borrowing and investing needs
as well as for entrepreneurs and small businesses
with revenues of up to $5 million.
This business is led by Aron Levine.
Preferred Banking is part of the
Consumer Banking segment reporting
to Dean Athanasia, president of
Regional Banking.

14 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

GLOBAL WEALTH &
INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT
MERRILL
Serves high net worth and ultra-high net worth clients.
Our personal advisor relationships allow us to help individual
investors and their families plan for and achieve their unique
fnancial goals.
This business is led by Andy Sieg.
PRIVATE BANK
Provides comprehensive wealth and estate planning,
investment management, and banking and lending solutions
to ultra-high net worth clients with investable assets of more
than $3 million.
This business is led by Katy Knox.

GLOBAL COMMERCIAL BANKING
Provides treasury, lending, leasing, advisory, and debt and
equity underwriting services to middle market companies
with revenues of $50 million to $2 billion across all major
industries. It brings clients the full capabilities of the
company paired with local service.
This business is led by Wendy Stewart.
Global Commercial Banking is part of the Global Banking
segment reporting to Dean Athanasia, president of
Regional Banking.
GLOBAL CORPORATE & INVESTMENT BANKING
Provides clients around the world and across all major
industries with solutions for treasury services, lending,
leasing, advisory, and debt and equity underwriting. Serves
corporate clients with more than $2 billion in revenues,
fnancial institutions and government agencies.

GLOBAL BANKING

This business is led by Matthew Koder.

BUSINESS BANKING
Locally based client relationship teams provide advisory and
banking services for credit, treasury, trade, foreign exchange,
equipment fnance and merchant services to more than
21,000 small and mid-sized U.S. companies with annual
revenues of $5 million to $50 million.

GLOBAL MARKETS

This business is led by Raul Anaya.
Business Banking is part of the Global Banking segment
reporting to Dean Athanasia, president of Regional Banking.

GLOBAL MARKETS
Provides services across the world’s debt, equity, commodity
and foreign exchange markets. This includes liquidity,
hedging strategies, industry-leading insights, analytics and
competitive pricing for corporate, commercial, government
and institutional investor clients.
This business is led by Jim DeMare.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 15

retail banking

eight lines of business

Helping our clients thrive
today and in the future
In Retail Banking, we support the fnancial health
of nearly 68 million U.S. consumer clients through
our fnancial center locations, ATMs and awardwinning digital banking capabilities, including Online
and Mobile Banking platforms, Erica® and Zelle®.
Under the leadership of Holly O’Neill, our Retail Banking teammates provide a
personalized experience that supports clients on their fnancial journey — as they budget,
spend, save and borrow to help meet their goals. We ofer simple-to-use fnancial
solutions for individuals and families, such as:
• Bank of America Advantage SafeBalance™ Banking, an account that helps
prevent overdraf fees
• BankAmericard® Secured Card, a credit card to establish, build and strengthen
credit history

6.6M
new clients
in 20221

Advancing economic mobility in
low- and moderate-income (LMI)
communities
LMI individuals and small businesses have
access to core banking products, services,
loans, technology, capital and jobs.
Approximately 29% of our fnancial
centers and 31% of our ATMs are in LMI
neighborhoods, and 44% are in majorityminority markets. Within these locations,
we’ve designated some fnancial centers
for community banking programs, stafed
with employees from local neighborhoods
who are trained to provide the right
solutions to help clients build fnancial
resiliency and wellbeing.

• Keep the Change®, to build savings automatically when making debit purchases
• Balance Assist™, a low-cost solution for clients to manage their short-term liquidity needs
• Balance Connect™, for overdraf protection
• Life Plan, to help set and track clients’ fnancial goals based on their life priorities
Our focus remains on helping clients wherever and however they prefer to bank, serving
our diverse communities and supporting fnancial education. Our approach has led to
more clients choosing to bank with us, including 6.6 million new consumer clients in
2022, up 13% over 2021— the largest increase in fve years.
Powering a more personalized experience through digital
As a world-class digital bank — backed by a network of approximately 3,900 fnancial
centers — we provide clients ease of service, choice and support through access to
products, solutions and expertise anytime, from anywhere. Nearly 73% of overall
households were digitally active in 2022. Additionally, client interactions with Erica
were up 23% and Zelle transactions were up 26% over 2021.
Protecting our clients’ information is a top priority — our online Security Center provides
tools and resources to help clients keep their fnancial information safe and secure. It
was visited nearly 25 million times in 2022. We also introduced mobile live chat through
our secure mobile app, so clients can easily message live agents when they’re on the go.

4.4M

new credit card
accounts, up 22%
year-over-year1
16 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

23%

increase in
Erica client interactions
year-over-year1

90%+
decrease in
overdraf
services fees
since 2009

To support sound fnancial habits, in 2022,
we eliminated non-sufcient funds (NSF)
fees, reduced overdraf fees from $35 to
$10 and eliminated the transfer fee
associated with our overdraf protection
service, Balance ConnectTM, resulting
in a decrease of more than 90% in
overdraf fees since 2009.

26%

increase in
Zelle transactions
year-over-year1

Creating generational wealth and
making afordable homeownership
a reality
We’re continuing our multi-year
$15 billion Bank of America Community
Homeownership Commitment® that helps
make homeownership more afordable and
sustainable, including a low down payment
mortgage and signifcant down payment and
closing cost grants. Through year-end, the
program has provided more than $10 billion
in lending and $383 million in grants,
assisting approximately 39,000 families.

$10B+

Providing education for a stronger
fnancial future
We provide extensive, personalized support
to help clients and community members
gain the knowledge they need to make
confdent fnancial decisions. Our Better
Money Habits® program ofers free, easyto-understand tools and resources with
hundreds of engaging videos, workshops
and articles, accessible in English and
Spanish.
We’re building on our strong foundation
of excellence as Retail Banking continues
to drive Responsible Growth to help
provide exceptional care to our clients
and communities on their journey to
fnancial health and economic mobility.

in lending through
Bank of America Community
Homeownership Commitment
through 2022

RETAIL
BANKING
Led by: Holly O’Neill
Ofering a wide range of products and
services to millions of U.S. consumers.
• Continued core client growth
with an all-time record 35.9M
Consumer Checking accounts
• Recognized as Best Consumer
Digital Bank in the U.S.
(Global Finance Magazine)
• Recognized in 2022 by J.D.
Power for outstanding customer
satisfaction with fnancial health
support

¹Represents our Consumer Banking segment, including Retail Banking and Preferred Banking
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 17

eight lines of business

preferred banking

Delivering personalized
advice and solutions to
clients and small businesses
Whether using their mobile phones or visiting a
fnancial center, our millions of mass afuent clients
and small business owners can rely on Preferred
Banking to help with their banking, borrowing and
investing needs. By combining our leading digital
capabilities, best-in-class solutions and access
to personalized guidance and advice, we’re able
to help clients pursue their fnancial goals during
every stage of life.

Clients continue to use
our 3,900 fnancial
centers to meet with
specialists. We invested
in state-of-the-art
functionality and
expanded our presence
in several key growth
markets in 2022.
Opened

58

new fnancial centers
and renovated nearly
800 in 2022

Helping clients with all their fnancial needs where and when they want
Led by Aron Levine, our team provides clients with a full range of fnancial solutions.
We take an integrated approach to serving clients through the convenience of our
award-winning digital platform and our national network of ATMs, fnancial centers and
centralized contact centers where more than 32,000 professionals provide advice and
guidance to clients.
Clients continue to use our 3,900 fnancial centers to meet with specialists. We invested
in state-of-the-art functionality and expanded our presence in several key growth markets
in 2022. These eforts also highlight our investment in our teammates to help them grow
professionally and continue enhancing our clients’ experiences.

32K+

teammates providing
advice and guidance
to clients

Delivering for clients throughout their fnancial life cycle
We help clients as their fnancial needs expand from banking transactions to self-directed
investments to managed investment portfolios.
Our Merrill Edge® Self-Directed platform ofers clients a personalized investing
experience that provides insights and tools to help them confdently put their investing
ideas into action when and how they want. For those who prefer to not go it alone
but want to use online tools, Merrill Guided Investing provides a goals-based advisory
program with investment portfolios built, rebalanced and monitored by Merrill
investment professionals. And, for those who want one-on-one guidance to pursue their
goals, Merrill Guided Investing provides clients the option to work with an advisor to
help them defne an investment strategy and periodically review their progress.
We’re also achieving growth in our Employee Banking and Investing Program, which ofers
employees of companies access to products and services to help them manage and
improve their fnancial lives. In 2022, we added 86 new companies, reaching a total of 282,
while growing the number of eligible employees to more than three million.

18 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

3.5M

consumer investment
accounts

282

total companies in our
Employee Banking and
Investing Program

PREFERRED
BANKING
Led by: Aron Levine
Providing personalized solutions,
valuable rewards and advice and
guidance to clients with more
complex banking, borrowing and
investing needs as well as for
small businesses.
• No. 1 in estimated U.S.
consumer deposits¹ at more
than $1T, up 8% in 2022²
• Merrill Edge Self-Directed named
one of the Best Online Stock
Brokers for Beginners by
NerdWallet (2023)
• Merrill Edge Self-Directed awarded
No. 1 Overall Client Experience
(6th consecutive year) from
StockBrokers.com 2023 Annual
Broker Review
• Leading small business lender,
with $23B in total outstanding
loans at the end of 2022

Rewarding clients for their loyalty
Our Preferred Rewards program, which recently surpassed 10 million members, rewards
consumer and small business clients for growing their relationship. This industry-leading
loyalty program ofers numerous benefts, including lower interest rates, cash bonuses and
discounts. Members have a 99% client retention rate and earn an average of $500 each
year, resulting in a total of over $3.5 billion in rewards annually.
Enabling business owners to achieve success
We continue to be among the nation’s largest small business lenders, ending the year
with $23 billion in loans. In 2022, we launched new solutions to help clients grow their
businesses, including the Business Advantage Credit Line and Unlimited Cash Rewards
Secured credit card for entrepreneurs just starting out.
Our expertise in helping clients achieve business success has led entrepreneurs
to rely on us for industry insights. Last year, we published our 10 th annual
Small Business Owner Report, sharing trends and data on entrepreneurs’ business
outlook and economic confdence, as well as key indicators of their success and
community involvement. We also maintain the Bank of America Access to Capital
Directory platform focused on women- and minority-owned businesses.
1

Based on June 30, 2022 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) deposit data

2

Represents our Consumer Banking segment, including Retail Banking and Preferred Banking

3

Includes clients in Consumer Banking, Small Business and Global Wealth & Investment Management
as of November 2022

10M+

clients enrolled in
Preferred Rewards3

99%

Preferred
Rewards Program
client retention
rate

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 19

merrill

eight lines of business

Gaining momentum with
modern Merrill
During 2022, Merrill Wealth Management
delivered record revenue thanks to our ongoing
commitment to helping clients manage every
aspect of their fnancial lives. Led by Andy Sieg,
Merrill provides a one-stop shop of fnancial
solutions and access to the full capabilities of
Bank of America through an advisor relationship
and industry-leading digital solutions.

92%

client
satisfaction

The power of our modern Merrill
strategy helps us drive growth and client
satisfaction through our advisors’ insights
and knowledge, innovation and diverse
perspectives.
Providing comprehensive,
personalized wealth management
advice, planning and services
Today’s investors place a premium on
fnancial advice from a trusted advisor.
Merrill advisors work closely with clients
to clearly defne their fnancial goals and
then deliver what matters most — from
sharing our thought leadership and insights
to fnancial planning and investing with
access to banking and lending. In 2022, we
made enhancements to Personal Wealth
Analysis™, our proprietary tool advisors use
in discussions with clients to defne and
prioritize goals and create personalized,
comprehensive plans. As a result of our
ongoing fnancial planning discussions,
client satisfaction reached 92% in 2022.
These conversations increased by 40%
over 2021 and rose to a fve-year high.

40%

increase in fnancial
planning discussions in
2022 compared to year-prior

Merrill is focused on helping advisors succeed
at every stage of their careers and recognizes the
importance of carrying forward the traditions
of today’s advisors who, time and again, win top
industry rankings.
20 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Growing our business responsibly
The strength of our diversifed business
is demonstrated through robust growth
of net new households —135,000 from
2018 through 2022. Record revenue of
$18.1 billion and $2.8 trillion in client
balances at year-end further underscore
the success of our modern Merrill strategy.

Our fnancial advisors help clients across
all 50 U.S. states, the District of
Columbia and several U.S. territories.

MERRILL
Led by: Andy Sieg
Serving high net worth
and ultra-high net worth clients.
Our personal advisor relationships
allow us to help each individual
investor plan for and achieve their
unique fnancial goals.
• No. 1 on Forbes’ Best-in-State
Wealth Advisors, Top Women
Wealth Advisors, Top Women
Wealth Advisors Best-in-State and
Top Next-Gen Advisors lists (2022)
• No. 1 on Barron’s Top 100
Women Advisors list

Leading the industry in innovation
Merrill introduced new high-tech, high-touch ways for advisors to serve clients, manage
their practices and acquire new business in 2022, and by year-end, 82% of clients were
digitally active.
One of this year’s highlights was the launch of Merrill Advisor Match — a new digital
platform that helps take the guesswork out of fnding the right advisor by connecting
people seeking fnancial advice with advisors who ft their needs. Since its launch in
October 2022, more than 6,600 Merrill advisors have completed their Merrill Advisor
Match profle and new clients have moved tens of millions in assets.
Achieving greater diversity of people and perspectives
As demographics and centers of wealth across America continue to change, Merrill seeks
to grow a diverse client base that is more refective of the communities we serve. We are
committed to becoming the frm of choice for women, Black/African Americans, HispanicLatinos, Asian Americans and members of the LGBTQ+ community.
To help achieve this, we have set ambitious goals for more diverse leadership, advisors
and clients.
Training the modern advisor
Training the next generation of Merrill advisors continues to be a top priority, and we
are increasing our emphasis on training in 2023. Following the relaunch of our Advisor
Development Program in mid-2021, we now have more than 1,000 trainees participating,
and the frst class will graduate in mid-2023.
The program provides comprehensive training to our new advisors and is designed
to support their development by leveraging the entire bank’s resources, insights
and capabilities.
Our growth story refects the transformative power and momentum of modern Merrill
and our tremendous opportunity to deliver diferentiated advice, service and solutions
for generations to come.

• No. 1 on Financial Planning’s
Top 40 Advisors Under 40 list
• 82% of Merrill households
digitally active across the
enterprise (year-end 2022)

135K

net new households added
from 2018 through 2022

$18.1B

record revenue in 2022

$2.8T

total client balances
at year-end 2022

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 21

eight lines of business

private bank

Providing comprehensive
wealth management
solutions for ultra-high net
worth clients
Led by Katy Knox, The Private Bank has more than
100 ofces in 41 U.S. markets. Through our local
market approach, we serve the unique fnancial
needs of our clients with dedicated teams
of experienced advisors, award-winning digital
solutions and the strength of Bank of America’s
broad capabilities.

We help our clients navigate their
complex needs by providing customized
products and solutions, including wealth
planning, trust and estate administration,
cash management, banking and lending,
investment management and philanthropy.
Committed to Responsible Growth
The Private Bank continued to acquire new
clients and deepen existing relationships in
2022. We ended the year with total client
balances of $564 billion and added nearly
2,600 net new relationships.
We grew responsibly by continuing to
expand our partnerships with other lines
of business across the company to serve
a wide range of needs. Our partnership
with Consumer Investments to place
dedicated Financial Solutions Advisors
(FSAs) in our ofces continues to yield
benefts for clients, helping us serve
entire families by delivering the full
spectrum of our banking and brokerage
capabilities to each relationship.

100+

ofces in 41 U.S. markets

Driving innovation
We continuously strive to serve our
clients with greater speed, security and
convenience. In 2022, we launched new
online and mobile features, such as
expanded e-signature capabilities and
digital wire transfers, to help clients more
easily transact and access a growing
number of products and services online.
Today, we’re proud to have a record 86%
of clients digitally active at year-end 2022
and are working to introduce new features
to help clients digitally open accounts
and more seamlessly move money. We
also continue to invest in technology to
modernize our service platform as part
of our commitment to deliver a fully
integrated and tailored client experience.

22 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

PRIVATE
BANK
Led by: Katy Knox
The Private Bank is the largest
provider of personal trust and
fduciary administration in the U.S.
and a leader in philanthropic services,
art services, banking and credit
solutions.
• Named Best Private Bank for
Philanthropic Services (Global; 2nd
consecutive year) and Best Private
Bank for Digital Solutions for
Clients (North America) by Global
Finance Magazine
• Named Best Private Bank
for Customer Service (3rd
consecutive year) and Best
Private Bank in the U.S. for
Philanthropy Services by
Professional Wealth Management

In 2022, we added approximately 75 new advisors
and core client team members to help grow and
support our clients, with many graduating from
our Advisor Development Program for early- and
mid-career professionals.
Developing top talent
Wealth demographics in the U.S. are changing as the Baby Boom generation focuses
on transferring wealth to heirs and supporting philanthropic causes. Our research shows
that younger Americans have diferent approaches than their parents to investing, giving
and wealth planning. In 2022, we added approximately 75 new advisors and core client
team members to help grow and support our client relationships, with many graduating
from our Advisor Development Program for early- and mid-career professionals. Today,
we’re focused on developing top talent at all levels — continuously investing in education,
programs and resources to build skills and support professional growth.
Building momentum
With our team’s commitment and expertise, combined with continued investments in
our platform, people and capabilities, The Private Bank is building momentum by driving
Responsible Growth.

$564B

client balances
at year-end 2022

2.6K

net new relationships
added in 2022

86%

of clients
digitally active
at year-end
2022

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 23

eight lines of business

business banking

Delivering the power of
our company to growing
businesses
Business Banking provides advice and a full
range of commercial fnancial services to U.S.based mid-sized businesses. Clients beneft
from our industry-leading thought leadership,
along with fnancial products including credit,
treasury management, merchant services,
foreign exchange and equipment fnancing.
Led by Raul Anaya, our client teams also partner with specialists in The Private Bank
and Merrill to deliver personal wealth solutions to clients.
Recognized for client experience
With the growing demand for our services, we added 150 relationship managers in 2022,
enabling our expert teams to deepen relationships with clients and prospects and to
capitalize on untapped market opportunities. To help our new teammates best serve
our clients, we worked with The Academy at Bank of America to introduce a robust
onboarding program.
This investment has enabled us to increase the number of in-person client meetings,
even as we grew our client base.
In 2022, J.D. Power Certifed Customer Service Program recognized Bank of America’s
Corporate, Global Commercial and Business Banking Services for providing “An
Outstanding Customer Service Experience” (13th consecutive year).
To further improve the client experience and take advantage of market opportunities, this
year we began to focus on specifc client segments, such as government contractors,
not-for-proft and healthcare businesses, and emerging growth business segments, to
advise on their unique individual needs. This efort joins our Community Business
Strategy focused on Asian American, Black/African American, Hispanic-Latino, veteranand women-owned businesses and their opportunity for growth.

To further improve the client experience and take
advantage of market opportunities, this year
we began to focus on specifc client segments.

24 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

160+

cities throughout the U.S.

150

new relationship managers
added in 2022

The digital journey continues
Businesses of all sizes are rapidly adopting
innovative tools and continuing to explore
more digital capabilities to improve their
operations. While meeting with clients,
our experts focus on how their businesses
are transforming and demonstrate how
our digital tools can help them manage
many aspects of their business fnances.
More than 80% of clients transacted with
us digitally in 2022 through the Business
Advantage 360 (BA360) and CashPro®
platforms, and demand for solutions
continues to accelerate.

80%+

of clients
digitally active
at year-end
2022

As part of the continuing transition to
digital processes, we moved our client
onboarding and document exchange online
and are using digital platforms to manage
client accounts. These changes save time
on more basic functions, freeing up our
team to spend more time on in-depth
discussions about client needs.

As their businesses change over time and grow in
revenue, we believe clients view us as their advisory
banking partner, poised to provide everything they
need to run their businesses, from start-up to
global player.
Driving opportunity through each stage of growth
As their businesses change over time and grow in revenue, we believe clients view us
as their advisory banking partner, poised to provide everything they need to run their
businesses, from start-up to global player.
We see the importance of our role as advisors, providing guidance to clients on how to
navigate the ever-changing business operating environment. As an example, clients aligned
to Business Banking and Global Commercial Banking seek support from our sustainability
team to plan for the transition to net zero greenhouse gas emissions. The team partners
across Bank of America to help companies defne their approach to a sustainable future.
Bank of America’s thought leadership resources and global expertise allow us to help
clients better understand the business case for sustainability and support them as
they navigate the transition to a low-carbon economy. Our clients welcome these
conversations, leading to opportunities for us to deepen our relationships.

BUSINESS
BANKING
Led by: Raul Anaya
Locally based client teams serve
thousands of U.S.-based business
clients, each with revenues between
$5 million and $50 million.
• Our dedicated team of
relationship managers, based in
more than 160 local communities,
meet with clients ofen at their
place of business
• Named North America’s Best
Bank for Small and MediumSized Enterprises by Euromoney
magazine (2022, 7th consecutive
year)
• Serves approximately 1 in 7
U.S. businesses

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 25

eight lines of business

global commercial banking

Serving as a trusted
advisor to companies
and organizations
Global Commercial Banking (GCB) serves as a
trusted advisor to middle-market companies
primarily in the U.S. and Canada — including their
international subsidiaries — delivering integrated
financial services and business planning tools.
Led by Wendy Stewart, GCB offers companies and organizations lending and financing
solutions, including commercial loans and leases, commitment facilities, trade finance,
commercial real estate lending and asset-based lending. We also offer treasury solutions,
such as cash management, foreign exchange, merchant services and short-term investing
options as well as valuable solutions for clients’ employees, including 401(k) and other
financial life benefits.
In 2022, we saw a 9% year-over-year increase in commercial loan volume and attracted
hundreds of new commercial clients to Bank of America. In addition, Bank of America
Community Development Banking provides financing for affordable housing and economic
development across the U.S. In 2022, we provided nearly $8 billion in debt and equity
financing, creating more than 10,000 units of affordable housing.

Bank of America Community Development Banking
provides financing for affordable housing and
economic development across the U.S. In 2022,
we provided nearly $8 billion in debt and equity
financing, creating more than 10,000 units of
affordable housing.
Digital solutions that make running a business easier
We are committed to making business easier for clients with our award-winning digital
banking platform, CashPro®. Clients use CashPro as a single point of access to manage
loans, deposits, payments, receivables, trade finance and reporting.
In 2022, we launched several new features to optimize how clients manage their business.
Innovations included patented quick-response (QR) sign-in technology in the CashPro
App for added security and convenience, an expanded Application Programming Interface
(API) allowing clients to access more than 350 payment types and digitized self-service
capabilities enabling clients to chat with experts using the CashPro App.

26 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Almost one-third
of Fortune 1,000 companies
are GCB clients

The CashPro App was recognized by Celent
in 2022 as the Model Bank for Corporate
Digital Banking.
Advising clients on the green
economy and other key focus areas
In keeping with our company’s goal
to achieve net zero greenhouse gas
emissions before 2050, GCB educates
clients about our commitments and works
with emerging green companies. Over the
last several years, in support of Bank of
America’s initial 2030 targets for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions associated
with financing activities, we have built a
sustainability team to help companies plan
for the transition to net zero. The 2022
Bank of America Task Force on Climaterelated Financial Disclosures (TCFD) report,
which outlines how we continue to manage
and mitigate climate-related financial risks,
is a key tool in these conversations.
We also provide advisory services
to specialized businesses, including
commercial real estate, technology,
healthcare, educational institutions,
not-for-profit organizations, restaurant
groups, automotive/vehicle companies
as well as sports leagues, teams and
stadiums. Clients also rely on us for
insights on digital transformation, talent
acquisition and other industry trends.
Building banker effectiveness
To help deliver exceptional service, we
continually invest in our team. In 2022,
The Academy at Bank of America
introduced training to enhance banker
effectiveness. Areas of focus range from
the art of dialogue and client acquisition
to advisory excellence and how to discuss
sustainability with clients.

We provide advisory services to specialized
businesses, including commercial real estate,
technology, healthcare, educational institutions,
not-for-proft organizations, restaurant groups,
automotive/vehicle companies as well as sports
leagues, teams and stadiums. Clients also
rely on us for insights on digital transformation,
talent acquisition and other industry trends.
In addition, we are improving how our bankers connect with clients, including by providing
our teams with outreach and marketing tools to better customize their client and
prospect communications and meetings.
As a result of our eforts to support the client experience, for 13 consecutive years, J.D.
Power has recognized us for providing “An Outstanding Customer Service Experience.”
Euromoney Awards for Excellence 2022 named us North America’s Best Bank for
Corporate Responsibility and, for seven consecutive years, North America’s Best Bank
for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises.

GLOBAL
COMMERCIAL
BANKING
Led by: Wendy Stewart
Global Commercial Banking serves
approximately one in fve U.S. middlemarket companies with revenues of
$50 million to $2 billion.
• Almost one-third of Fortune
1,000 companies are GCB clients
• Provides relationship management
coverage in more than 100 U.S.
cities and all 50 U.S. states
• Recognized by J.D. Power
Certifed Customer Service
Program for providing “An
Outstanding Customer Service
Experience” (2022, 13th
consecutive year)

9%

increase in commercial
loan volume year-over-year

350+

client payment types
and digitized self-service
capabilities

75%

of clients
digitally active¹
at year-end
2022

¹Represents commercial, corporate and business banking clients across our CashPro and BA360 platforms as of November 2022
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 27

eight lines of business

global corporate & investment banking

Delivering for clients
in a changing economic
environment
Global Corporate & Investment Banking (GCIB)
delivers integrated fnancial solutions,
capital markets execution and advice to large
corporate clients, middle-market frms and
emerging growth companies.
We operate in 35+ countries around the world.

Led by Matthew Koder, GCIB provides clients solutions that span the entire capital structure,
including loans, leases, bonds, convertibles, initial public oferings (IPOs), follow-on oferings,
private capital fundraising and mergers and acquisitions. We also provide best-in-class
global liquidity and treasury management solutions.
Driving Responsible Growth
While 2022 was a strong year for Bank of America as a whole, GCIB revenue was down
slightly from the record year of 2021 as a result of rising interest rates and challenging
market conditions. This led to a slowdown in investment banking activity throughout the
year, as the needs of our clients shifed in response to these developments.
In the face of these market headwinds, GCIB remained a steadfast and trusted partner
committed to delivering for our clients, a hallmark of our client-frst culture. Clients sought
advice and market insights ofered by our experienced banking teams to help them address
strategic decisions, fnancing transactions and day-to-day execution. We continue to deepen
these relationships to help clients achieve their goals.
28 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

One key to GCIB’s continuing success
in delivering for our clients, teammates,
communities and shareholders in any
environment is our breadth of oferings
and fexibility:
• In investment banking, where the
market refected weaker industrywide
underwriting activity, we were No. 3
in investment banking fees for 2022
(Dealogic), with our global activities
covering more than 4,000 capital markets
and advisory transactions (Dealogic).
• In corporate banking, we increased our
loan and lease balances while maintaining
client deposits, despite the higher interest
rate environment.
• Revenues from our global transaction
services business signifcantly increased
by 38% year-over-year.
GCIB ultimately achieved our second-best
revenue year on record in 2022, behind
only our record year in 2021, showcasing
how Responsible Growth helps enable us
to manage for the long term and prepare
ourselves for challenging economic
environments.
Driving innovation and improving
experiences
We continue enhancing interactions with
our clients to help them increase efciency,
extract insights from their data and
manage risk well using our cutting-edge
technology. With the growing trend toward
the “consumerization of wholesale” in
2022, our award-winning digital platform,
CashPro®, ofered clients a way to take
greater control of their treasury operations
through enhanced personalized, proactive
and predictive solutions. This innovative
platform sets the bar on elevating the client
experience and ease of doing business by
providing efciency through automation
and integration with their existing systems.
Recent recognition includes awards
for World’s Best Bank in Payments and
Treasury (Euromoney), Model Bank for
Corporate Digital Banking (Celent) and
No. 1 Overall Digital Channels Module
(Coalition Greenwich).
To help enhance the employee experience,
we launched a new proprietary global
knowledge management platform in
2022 to provide our teammates access to

resources and deal execution tools through a consolidated, one-stop portal. Advances like
this help create efciencies and streamline work processes, ultimately providing added
value to both our employees and clients.
Helping clients with environmental, social and governance (ESG) and
transition to net zero greenhouse gas emissions
The transition to a low-carbon economy requires a signifcant fow of capital across
markets and sectors. In 2022, we added resources globally to provide deep expertise on
ESG issues that impact our clients’ funding needs, valuations and strategic decisions by
enhancing our Sustainable Banking Solutions Group. By building and training the team,
intensifying client engagement and committing to net zero and ESG-related governance,
we expanded our capabilities in this area. In 2022, GCIB was No. 1 globally in ESG debt
issuance volumes — and we are well-positioned to continue advising clients on how best
to achieve their sustainability goals.
Working to enhance diversity in the workplace
GCIB is focused on creating a diverse and inclusive working environment through
internal mobility, career development and networking. We seek top talent at every
level and provide all employees with exposure, mentorship and new opportunities. We
devote signifcant resources and use personal connections and networks to help build
a diverse pipeline of talent and help create a sustainable, proactive and personalized
approach to talent sourcing. By bringing more people into the process, we’ve enhanced
the engagement and accountability of all our teams, which helps build that pipeline and
improve representation gaps.
Building for the future
Looking ahead, we will continue our relentless drive to help clients succeed. Delivering for
our clients — and growing with them — is vital to being a dedicated and dependable partner,
and we will continue leveraging the full breadth of Bank of America to deliver for them.

GLOBAL
CORPORATE
& INVESTMENT
BANKING
Led by: Matthew Koder
Providing advisory, underwriting
and banking services to thousands
of large corporate clients, middlemarket frms and emerging growth
companies worldwide.
• Ranked No. 1 among global lead
banks for investment grade and
leveraged fnance capital raised in
2022 (Dealogic)
• Named by Global Finance as
2022 Outstanding Financial
Innovator — Global
• Conducts business with
approximately 70% of the 2022
Fortune Global 500

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 29

eight lines of business

global markets

Providing a diversifed
business model for our
clients globally
Global Markets provides services across the world’s
debt, equity, commodity and foreign exchange
markets to approximately 8,000 clients consisting
of asset managers, hedge funds, pensions and
insurance, corporates, governments and other
fnancial institutions.

Creating value through our platform
Led by Jim DeMare, our sales and trading
platform ofers market-making, fnancing,
securities-clearing and settlement
services to our clients in support of
their investing and trading activities
globally. To further support our clients,
nearly 700 analysts in Bank of America’s
award-winning BofA Global Research
organization provide industry-leading
research and insights. Their expertise
combined with our platform is at the core
of the value we deliver to help our clients
make informed trading decisions and
achieve their investment goals.
Global Markets sits at a unique
intersection across Bank of America’s
broad client base, enabling business
synergies across our lines of business.
In partnership with teammates across
the company, we work with corporate,
commercial, government and institutional
investor clients to provide capital raising
and risk management solutions.
Helping clients navigate the
economic environment
In a year marked by accelerated central
bank tightening, persistent infationary
pressures and geopolitical tensions,
we believe we successfully delivered
Responsible Growth. While 2022 saw a
broad decline in asset prices across both
fxed income and equities, coupled with
mixed volatility, our dedicated teams
helped clients navigate these challenging
market conditions by leveraging the
breadth of our platform, while delivering
for our shareholders, deepening existing
relationships and adding nearly 600 new
institutional clients.

700

analysts in BofA Global
Research organization

600

new institutional clients
in 2022

30 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

On a full-year basis, market conditions and client business activities drove sales and
trading revenue of $16.5 billion, our highest performance since 2010, while capital
markets fees decreased as companies were reluctant to come to market. In this mixed
environment, our diversifed business model continued to work as expected. Our Equities
franchise in particular achieved record sales and trading revenue, while our Fixed Income,
Currencies and Commodities (FICC) businesses achieved its highest sales and trading
revenue since 2011. Over the past two years, we invested in our FICC Macro products
capabilities, including currencies, interest rates and commodities products, yielding a
sales and trading revenue increase of 38% year-over-year.
Enhancing our capabilities and driving innovation
Our focus remains on providing consistent, stable coverage and world-class capabilities
to better serve our clients. Prioritizing our investment in technology and data continues to
drive our business forward.
In 2022, building on our successful equities e-trading platform, our fxed income
algorithms responded to approximately 90% of electronic tickets globally in some of
the deepest bond markets, such as U.S. Treasuries, European government bonds and U.S.
investment grade corporate bonds. Additionally, in an already highly electronic market,
our franchise foreign exchange (FX) algorithmic volumes increased 27% globally.
By strengthening our core oferings and embracing next-generation technology, we
continue to drive operational efciencies and automate workfows to reduce expenses.
In 2022, we incorporated newer technologies, such as natural language processing,
distributed ledger technology, low code solutions and operational bots, to automate and
strengthen workfows and operations.

By strengthening our core oferings and
embracing next-generation technology, we
continue to drive operational efciencies and
automate workfows to reduce expenses.
Being a great place to work
In 2022, we successfully launched our Financial Innovation program globally. Under the
guidance of a mentor, junior-level teammates in the program are encouraged to bring
their unique perspectives together and work collaboratively on a business-identifed
challenge to drive actionable innovation and solutions. With more than 130 alumni to date,
the program has provided an innovation framework and fueled a culture of continuous
improvement.
In addition to this program and others focused on our mid-level talent, the Global Markets
Women’s Leadership Series features external distinguished women business leaders to
encourage diverse perspectives and inspire our teams to reach greater heights in their
own career progression and client services.
In partnership with our teammates across the enterprise, we remain committed to
making Bank of America a great place to work while delivering a world-class experience
for our clients and Responsible Growth for shareholders.

GLOBAL
MARKETS
Led by: Jim DeMare
Providing solutions across the debt,
equity, commodity and foreign
exchange markets to corporate,
commercial, government and
institutional investor clients around
the world.
• Employee presence in 29
markets, serving a global
franchise
• Americas Derivatives House of
the Year and Americas House of
the Year for Equity Derivatives,
FX Derivatives, Interest Rate
Derivatives and Commodities
Derivatives (GlobalCapital, 2022)
• Interest Rate Derivatives House
of the Year (Risk.net, 2022)
• Global Leader for Sustainable
Project Finance (Global Finance,
2022)

$16.5B

in sales and trading
revenue — record high
since 2010

9%

increase in total sales and
trading revenue year-over-year

130+

alumni of our Financial
Innovation program,
launched globally in 2022

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 31

local markets organization

Local & Digital
Spotlights

Delivering for
our clients and
communities
through our
market presidents
Our market presidents deliver
Responsible Growth by providing
the full range of our capabilities
across nearly 100 communities.
Our presence in diferent U.S. markets makes us
accessible and knowledgeable for our customers
from coast to coast. As part of the local landscape,
we’re familiar with an area’s unique traits, as well
as its organizations and resources. As part of each
local community, we understand its economy, culture,
strengths and challenges. We strive to deliver efective
solutions and service by matching the right resources
to our clients’ individual needs.
Leading the way in these communities are Bank of
America market presidents, who oversee integrated
business teams to help deliver the full capabilities of
our company to each client and lead our interactions
with nonproft partners.

32 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Spotlighting our Chicago market
Our teammates bring together the company’s network of
professionals and resources across every line of business to help
improve clients’ fnancial lives, strengthen where we live and work
and support employees in their professional growth.
An example of this strategy in action is our Chicago market, where
we’ve had a presence for more than 160 years and continue to
grow market share by delivering for clients. Today, more than
5,200 teammates support our clients and communities in the area.
Across all our lines of business, we provide solutions through a local
network of more than 130 fnancial centers, 470 ATMs and nearly
15 combined Merrill and The Private Bank ofces. We also recently
opened our new Bank of America Tower along the Chicago River,
the tallest commercial ofce building completed in the city in the
past 30 years.
In 2022, the team in Chicago worked with clients to help achieve
their fnancial goals, which translated to $448 million in loans to
small businesses, $14 billion in loans to commercial businesses,
$937 million in home loans and $61 billion in total FDIC deposits.
“What sets us apart in Chicago, and how we are growing
organically in the market, is the combination of our local
knowledge and global resources to help our clients and partners
achieve their goals,” said Rita S. Cook, president of Bank of
America Chicago. “We have incredible integration across the
business to bring forward digital tools, personalized solutions
and local experts, and to deploy capital to help solve some of
Chicagoland’s most pressing needs.”
One example of integrated delivery of the company’s capabilities
is the recent collaboration between The Private Bank, Global
Markets and Global Commercial Banking to provide our
Corporate Employee Banking & Investing program to a Chicagobased fnancial services client. Another example is Merrill, with

$89 billion in client balances in the market at year-end 2022, which
connected Small Business Banking to a wealth management
client to seamlessly transition banking services for a wholesale
manufacturing goods company they had recently purchased.
The team is deeply embedded in the fabric of Chicagoland. The
market directed $13 million in funding to more than 100 area
nonproft organizations working to drive economic opportunity
for individuals and families in underserved communities in 2022.
Chicago employees also personally support local nonprofts and
community needs, including contributing more than 228,000
volunteer hours since 2018 to the causes they care about.
One partner is the Chicago Community Loan Fund, which provides
fexible fnancing and technical assistance to initiatives for lowand moderate-income neighborhoods, families and individuals.
Its president, Calvin Holmes, was also recognized with the Bank
of America Neighborhood Builders® Racial Equality Award for his
contributions to breaking racial barriers and creating opportunities
for people of color.
The team also drives positive impact through the Bank of America
Chicago Distance Series, including the 8K, half marathon and
marathon events.
The Bank of America Chicago Marathon alone generates more
than $386 million in economic impact to Chicagoland annually,
while providing the equivalent of more than 2,800 jobs at a time
of year when tourism in the city would otherwise experience a
seasonal decline.
Additionally, thousands of runners participate in the race’s Charity
Program, raising a record-breaking $27.6 million in 2022.
This commitment to local delivery is replicated in each of our local
markets across the country, helping us deliver Responsible Growth
for our clients, teammates and communities.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 33

digital capabilities

local & digital spotlights

Placing digital at the center
of our client relationships
We’ve disrupted traditional banking
to ofer award-winning digital
experiences for consumer, wealth
management and business clients.
Consistent investment in fnancial
technology, plus a sustained focus
on delivering timely and relevant
digital solutions with the client
top-of-mind, has fueled growth in
digital engagement and satisfaction
across most lines of business.
With a record 11.6 billion digital logins and 56 million verifed
digital users in 2022 — up 3% year-over-year — there are
increasingly more digital touchpoints to make clients feel valued
and in control of their fnancial wellbeing. From Erica®, our
virtual fnancial assistant that makes it easier for consumers to
manage day-to-day fnances, to digital tools that modernize
and streamline business operations, we’re constantly innovating
to deliver next-generation features and solutions that help
clients manage their fnancial lives with increased ease,
convenience and security.

Bank of America mobile app
Clients can manage their banking, investment,
retirement and wealth relationships from a
single platform.
• Record 35.5M active mobile users in Q4 2022
• 87% mobile client satisfaction in 2022
• 7.8B+ record mobile logins in 2022

34 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Erica®
Our popular virtual fnancial
assistant, Erica, excels at
resolving client inquiries,
helping clients get the help
and fnd the answers
they need.
• Assisted 33.5M total users
with nearly 1.2B interactions
since launch

Payments & Zelle®
More and more, clients are using
our digital platforms to move
money, including fast, free and
convenient options to pay family,
friends and a growing number of
small businesses.
• $2.8T moved by clients across
our platforms in 2022 (up 13%
year-over-year) — more than
cash and check combined —
to accept and send payments

Merrill Guided
Investing
Our goals-based advisory
program provides clients advice
and a portfolio monitored
and rebalanced by Merrill
professionals — all at a low cost.
• Total assets under
management grew from $0 to
$15.9B in under 6 years.

Merrill Advisor
Match
Prospective clients answer a
series of questions — ranging
from goals, communication
style and personality — to
match them with a customized
list of Financial Advisors.
• Nearly 7K advisors have
enrolled in the program since
launch in fall 2022.

Life Plan

CashPro® & BA360

Bank of America Life Plan®
helps clients set and track
fnancial goals, integrating
banking, savings, lending
and investing solutions with
personalized insights and
guidance.
• Nearly 9.4M clients have
created a Life Plan since
2020 — an increase of more
than 3M clients year-over-year.

Our powerful and innovative
digital platforms help
businesses gain efciencies
with tools that ft seamlessly
into their workfow.
• 75% of commercial, corporate
and business banking clients
are digitally active across our
CashPro and BA360 platforms,
as of November 2022.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 35

diverse entrepreneurs

Community
Impact

Helping diverse
entrepreneurs
drive economic
opportunity
We continue to support our
communities by investing in
local businesses.
Some estimate that less than 2% of venture capital
funds are allocated to startups with diverse leaders. Our
sustained commitment to providing funds for underresourced business owners and entrepreneurs is helping
women entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs of color establish
and grow their businesses locally, generating economic
opportunities that create jobs and build wealth.
To power this investment, we provide capital for funds
led by diverse managers, as well as growth equity funding
for the minority entrepreneurs they support, to help
diminish the barriers that make it difcult for Black/
African American, Hispanic-Latino, Asian American, Native
American and other underrepresented minority and women
entrepreneurs to access start-up and growth capital.
We’ve committed $421 million to more than 130 funds
which are approximately 67% Black/African American
owned/led, 22% Hispanic-Latino owned/led and
59% women owned/led, and are ultimately expected
to invest in an estimated 2,000-plus minority- and
women-led companies over fve years.

We’ve committed $421M to 130+ funds
owned or led by diverse entrepreneurs,
including:

67%

Black/African Americans

22%

Hispanic-Latinos

36 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

59%
Women

$200M

low-cost deposit program in
minority depository institutions
—doubling our commitment
We also work with an established network
of community partners that provides
capital or serves as depository institutions.
For instance, in 2022 we doubled our
low-cost deposit program in minority
depository institutions to $200 million,
which will in turn provide more access
to capital for minority and low- and
moderate-income entrepreneurs and
communities.
Additionally, we launched the Bank of
America Access to Capital Directory for
Black Entrepreneurs and Hispanic-Latino
Entrepreneurs, which has more than 440
sources of capital, ranging from grants to
equity investments to loans. The directory
is also available in Spanish and builds on
ongoing work with partners to connect
entrepreneurs to capital, including the
Tory Burch and Bank of America Capital
Program and the Bank of America Loan
Fund for Women Entrepreneurs at Kiva.
Diverse entrepreneurs also need additional
resources and opportunities to manage
and scale a successful business. In 2022,
we announced an expansion of the
Bank of America Institute for Women’s
Entrepreneurship at Cornell, bringing
the total enrollment of small business
owners to 100,000, 90% of whom identify
as women of color. Through our Global
Ambassadors Program, we continue to
support Vital Voices, investing in emerging
women leaders around the world, and the
Cherie Blair Foundation for Women, helping
to enable women in developing economies
to build business skills and access capital.
Through these programs, we’ve provided
nearly one million hours of training and
mentoring to women from over
140 countries, enabling more than
130,000 women entrepreneurs to
grow their businesses.
These commitments are part of our
longstanding work to help advance racial
equality and economic opportunity, invest
in women and economically empower our
communities around the world.

“Bank of America has always been a part of my life — from opening a
savings account as a child to my frst credit card and, now, to being
partners in a shared vision of fnancial inclusion. VamosVentures
believes a strong and competitive America requires fnding
and supporting the best talent and ideas, wherever
they may be. As an Angelino, Latino and American,
I’m proud of the work we’re doing, and I’m
proud to call Bank of America a partner.”
Marcos C. Gonzalez
Founder and Managing Partner
VamosVentures

“It takes diverse investors to identify the overlooked opportunities
where value will be created over the next decade.
Bank of America’s investment in emerging
managers substantiates the return potential and
allows for the next generation of innovators
to thrive.”
Heather Hartnett
Founding Partner and CEO
Human Ventures

“Bank of America’s commitment accelerated our investments in
women and minority founders nationwide and also allowed us to
attract a broader audience of investors. More importantly,
Bank of America has been a true partner, helping
us evaluate several companies in our portfolio
for potential business relationships and
partnerships.”
Nitin Rai
Founder and Managing Partner
Elevate Capital

“Bank of America’s commitment to Black-led funds was instrumental
in BTN.vc’s early success. Leveraging the bank’s purposeful investment
and powerful brand allowed BTN.vc to quickly reach a $25 million frst
close in 2021 towards a $50 million goal. We’ve
now been able to fund a portfolio of 100%
diverse, high-potential sofware companies —
currently 80% Black and 80% women.”
Kelauni Jasmyn
General Partner
Black Tech Nation Ventures
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 37

sustainable finance

community impact

Financing a secure
energy future
In 2021, we set a goal to achieve net
zero greenhouse gas emissions in our
fnancing, operations and supply chain
before 2050.
We are already carbon neutral in our operations, procure
all of our electricity from renewable sources and, in 2022,
announced 2030 targets for reducing emissions associated
with fnancing activities related to auto manufacturing,
energy and power generation.
We work across our company and with our clients to support
society’s transition to a secure, low-carbon economy while also
helping catalyze eforts globally by playing a leading role in forums
focused on accelerating and scaling climate fnance in a targeted
and equitable manner. These include the Sustainable Markets
Initiative (SMI), which was launched by His Majesty King Charles III
in his former role as His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales.
CEO Brian Moynihan, who serves as SMI chair, convened the
200 active CEO members throughout 2022, including at the 27th
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP27), to help drive collective
creativity, innovation and capital mobilization towards a
sustainable future.
Our clients, suppliers and partners have their own plans to address
the need for energy afordability, sustainability and security. As
a global fnancial institution, we support clients in every industry
through these transitions with comprehensive fnancial solutions,
including lending, capital raising, advisory and investment services.
We mobilized capital through our asset-based lending, tax equity
and placement activities across clean energy sub-sectors like
wind, solar, distributed generation and associated infrastructure.
And, we are developing tailored fnancial solutions for emerging
clean energy technologies that will augment traditional renewable
energy sources and help achieve a clean, secure energy future.

38 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

The transition will require a signifcant investment: some
estimates are as high as $275 trillion over the next 30 years.
This is an important business opportunity for Bank of America and
for our clients that we expect to lead to job creation, economic
activity and technological innovation. Working with our clients
in every industry, we’ve made signifcant progress on our 2021
target to mobilize and deploy $1.5 trillion in sustainable fnance
by 2030, $1 trillion of which is aligned to the environmental
transition and $500 billion to inclusive social development.
We are also one of the largest U.S. corporate issuers of ESGthemed bonds. In 2022, we issued our third Equality Progress
Sustainability Bond for $2 billion, designed to help advance
racial and gender equality, economic opportunity and environmental
sustainability.
While environmental investments are critical, we also have
a strong focus on social inclusive development, including
investments in afordable housing and community banks.
Through the SMI and other forums, such as the Net-Zero
Banking Alliance, First Movers Coalition and Breakthrough
Energy Catalyst, we partner with governments, regional lenders,
development fnance institutions (DFIs) and philanthropies to
bridge the funding gap and mobilize private capital toward
sustainable development in emerging markets:
• We’re exploring opportunities with DFIs to structure a blended
fnance loan facility for CrossBoundary Energy to support
their development pipeline of solar and wind generation and
storage projects in Africa.
• We’re deepening our relationship with InterEnergy by providing
a loan facility in partnership with a multilateral development bank
to support the construction and operation of eligible renewable
energy and clean transportation infrastructure projects located in
Small Island Developing States in the Caribbean.
• We’re supporting Just Energy Transition Partnership with
both Indonesia and Vietnam as part of a coalition working toward
the facilitation and mobilization of public and private fnancing
to help with the transition of each country’s power sector toward
renewable energy and increase investment in transition-aligned
jobs and industries of the future.

jobs initiatives

Helping make rewarding
jobs more accessible
Developing workforce potential is key to supporting
sustainable, thriving communities.
We help do this by investing in local communities to connect low- and moderate-income
(LMI) and diverse individuals to family-sustaining, high-demand jobs that fuel economic
opportunity. A meaningful job opportunity goes beyond the paycheck — it’s a pathway
to reduce student debt, obtain health care and retirement benefts and, ultimately, build
wealth and economic mobility for an individual, their family and their community.
We recognize the opportunity to help make connections between employers and skillsbuilding institutions, such as community colleges, to improve an individual’s ability to
obtain the qualifying skills for a family-sustaining job. We bridge this gap by directly
connecting employers and skills-building partners to ultimately support career
pathways to livable-wage jobs.

We connect employers
and skills-building
partners to ultimately
support career
pathways.
Our approach focuses on the specifc
workforce requirements of actual
employers and delivering the necessary
training and programming with partners
able to fll that need. This is driven
by convening nonproft organizations
and academic institutions, creating
tailored solutions to ft each of our
local markets, hiring through external
community partnerships, and the training
and professional development available
internally from The Academy, our awardwinning onboarding, education and
professional development organization.

2022 highlights
In 2022, we invested $99 million in workforce development,
including:

We partner with nearly 200 external organizations to train and
identify diverse talent, including:

• $9.6 million with 50 national workforce training
partners to help fll in-demand jobs in growth industries

• Designing a 16-week course to prepare students for
entry-level careers as relationship bankers

• $7.7 million toward signature programs as part of a
four-year, $31 million efort to increase diverse talent pipelines
in high-growth careers

• Developing a two-year skills-based curriculum to
supplement science, technology, engineering and math
(STEM) curriculum for 40 students to help prepare them for
entry-level roles in global technology and operations

• Nearly $44 million since 2011 in support of summer
jobs for over 27,000 low-income youth in more than 80
communities. We also worked with nonproft organizations
that provide support for diverse student success.
• Engaging with employers through 209 employer forums
• Working alongside 990 employers contributing to local
initiatives through employer forums, academic institutions
and/or nonproft partners
• Working to provide opportunities for those with barriers
to employment, including those formerly incarcerated and
persons with disabilities
In our own hiring, we help provide career opportunities to LMI
individuals through partnerships with organizations like the
national OneTen coalition and local apprenticeship, leadership
and mentorship programs.

• Leveraging our Better Money Habits® resources to build a
certifcate program with curated content for high
schools, community colleges and partners
With the resources of The Academy, our award-winning onboarding,
education and professional development organization, we’ve
introduced skills-building for community members, leveraging
educational content we’ve developed for teammates to build on the
many ways we help connect people to jobs. Notably:
• The Academy’s educational oferings help prepare
individuals for a career in any profession through skillspecifc learning and training, fostering economic mobility
and inspiring career confdence.
• The Academy also has conducted live sessions with more
than 1,200 participants and provided support to more than
1,000 external participants to prepare them for a position
at Bank of America or another employer.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 39

other highlights in 2022
Supporting economic opportunity for
diverse people and communities

community impact

We help support sustainable communities by providing access
to lending and capital for homeowners, business owners and
entrepreneurs. Specifcally, we’ve committed:
• $15 billion to an afordable homeownership program to
help 60,000 individuals and families purchase a home. Since the
program launched in 2019, we have helped more than 39,000
individuals and families with more than $10 billion in afordable
lending to purchase a home and provided nearly $383 million in
down payment and closing cost grants.
• $44 million to 23 minority depository institutions (MDIs)
• $421 million to more than 130 equity funds to provide
capital to diverse entrepreneurs and small business owners

$15B

to affordable homeownership

Sustainable fnance
We work across our company and with our clients to help
transition to a secure, low-carbon economy. We’re also helping
catalyze eforts globally by convening and participating in several
global forums focused on driving and accelerating progress.
• We’ve made tremendous progress to scale and accelerate capital
to drive environmental and social change, having mobilized and
deployed approximately $410 billion since 2021 as part of
our $1.5 trillion by 2030 sustainable fnance target.
• We originated more than $263 million in loans and
investments to Community Development Financial
Institutions (CDFIs) that fnance afordable housing, economic
development, small businesses, healthcare centers, charter
schools and other community services. With a total portfolio
of $2 billion at year-end, Bank of America continues to be the
largest investor in CDFIs in the United States.
• We provided a record $7.9 billion in loans, tax credit equity
investments and other real estate development solutions
through Community Development Banking to fnance afordable
housing and economic development. Between 2005 and 2022, we
fnanced more than 238,000 afordable housing units.¹

Supporting our teammates’ health
and safety and fghting hunger in
our local markets

$1.5T

sustainable fnance target by 2030

We donated more than $18 million to fght hunger with
a donation for each teammate who received a fu and/or
coronavirus vaccination or booster. That’s in addition to our
ongoing commitment to address hunger relief,
totaling $35 million in 2022.

$35M

to fght hunger in 2022
40 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

¹ Based on estimated number of affordable housing units at the time of credit
application. These numbers were not updated to reflect actual once the
project was completed.

Listening to valuable external
perspectives
To better understand the needs of our clients and communities,
we seek outside perspectives. In 2005, we formed our National
Community Advisory Council (NCAC), a forum made up of
senior leaders from social justice, consumer advocacy, community
development, environmental and research organizations that
provide external perspectives, guidance and feedback on our
business policies and practices.

Impacting local neighborhoods
We continue to invest in our signature philanthropic programs,
Neighborhood Builders®, Neighborhood Champions,
Student Leaders® and summer youth employment, which
recognize the community leadership and service of nonprofit
organizations and students across the U.S. To date, these
programs have supported more than 1,600 local nonprofits and the
leadership development of approximately 3,000 nonprofit
executives. In 2022, the programs supported workforce
development of more than 4,000 students across 92 markets.

Employee giving and volunteering
We continued both in-person and virtual volunteering across the
globe, promoting opportunities for our employees to serve in the
communities where we live and work. Over the course of the year,
employees contributed nearly two million volunteer hours
and directed more than $65 million in combined individual
giving and the bank’s matching gifts, volunteer grants and other
employee-directed giving programs, impacting more than 40,000
nonprofits around the world.

Arts, culture and heritage
Our programs support both local and global nonprofit institutions
to help communities thrive, make the arts more inclusive and
promote cultural sustainability. In 2022, we invested more than
$41 million in support of programs like the Art Conservation
Project, Art in our Communities® and Museums on Us®.

$41M+

in support of arts programs

Philanthropic giving
In 2022, we provided nearly $360 million in philanthropic
investments to help drive economic mobility in the
communities we serve, including more than $99 million in
support of workforce development and jobs, $80 million for
community development and affordable housing, and more
than $90 million for basic needs, including nearly $4 million
for natural disaster and humanitarian needs.

Nearly

$360M

in philanthropic investments

2M

volunteer
hours

$65M+

combined
giving

Better Money Habits®
Through Better Money Habits, we connect people to guidance and
tools that help them take control of their finances. Since launching
in 2013, free financial education on our Better Money
Habits platform has been viewed more than 3.5 billion
times across all platforms, including approximately 7.4 million
site visits in 2022. Additionally, consumers clicked to make an
appointment with a financial center specialist nearly 27,000 times.
Visits to our Spanish site, Mejores Hábitos Financieros™, are up
30% from 2021 to 2022.

3.5B+

Better Money Habits platform views

Supplier diversity and responsible
sourcing
We spend $2 billion with diverse suppliers across our global
company annually. As part of our goal, we have a target to have
70% of global suppliers, by spend, set greenhouse gas emissions
reduction or renewable energy targets by 2030.
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 41

Human Capital
Management
Update

A letter from
Sheri Bronstein
One of the hallmarks of Bank of
America — and what I believe
truly sets us apart — is our
culture of caring, compassion
and support for one another.
This was apparent once again
in 2022 as we continued to
focus on health and safety
and the changing face of
wellness. We expanded our
programs to support skills and
career development, while also
welcoming tens of thousands
of new teammates to our
company. And, we continued to support an inclusive
environment where our teammates can bring their
whole selves to work.
With the world gradually moving from pandemic to
endemic, health and safety was again a major priority.
Throughout the year, we continued to ofer onsite
vaccination and booster clinics for both the coronavirus
and fu. We also encouraged teammates to invest in
their health by getting a coronavirus vaccine or booster
and fu vaccine. In return, we donated $50 to their local
food bank, along with a company match. In total, we
provided nearly $19 million across 145 local food
banks in recognition of our employees who took
care of their health.

42 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

One of the highlights of 2022 was that
we were able to do so much together
in person again. Across the world, our
teammates celebrated the ability to
reconnect and collaborate. One way we
supported this was by providing free
lunch to all teammates across the globe
in September, October and November.
Teammates shared hundreds of photos
of their lunch gatherings, as well as other
occasions and celebrations throughout
the year.

“With a great appreciation for the importance
of mental health and the toll the pandemic took
on many, we expanded our emotional wellness
resources to provide more opportunities
and resources for employees to access help
for themselves and their family members.”
Sheri Bronstein
Chief Human Resources Oﬃcer
We also took steps to ofer medical care that continues to be accessible for our
teammates. We have held medical plan premiums fat for the 10th consecutive year
for employees earning less than $50,000 a year.

The investments we’ve made in our
teammates has positioned us to continue
building on our foundation. We will continue
to use this report as a way to illustrate and
measure our eforts in being a great place
for our teammates to work.

With a great appreciation of the importance of mental health and the toll the pandemic
took on many, we expanded our emotional wellness resources to provide more ways for
employees to access help for themselves and family members. We doubled the number
of free in-person consultations through our Employee Assistance Program (from six to 12)
on top of unlimited phone consultations. We continued to ofer virtual behavioral health
consultations through our telehealth provider in the U.S. Additionally, we announced a
new global sabbatical program to start in 2023 that recognizes employees who have built
their career with us, ofering 4–6 weeks of paid time of starting at 15 years of service to
recharge and refocus.
In a year with one of the most challenging labor markets in recent history, we showed
Bank of America is a company where you can grow and thrive throughout your career.
We expanded The Academy at Bank of America to provide world-class onboarding and
skill development. And, we welcomed 39,000 new teammates and helped 30,000 existing
employees stay with the company and move to new roles. We continue to be a leader in
establishing a minimum rate of pay for U.S. hourly employees, and, in 2022, we moved to
$22 per hour as part of our commitment to reach $25 by 2025.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 43

human capital management update

benefits overview

Supporting the physical,
emotional and fnancial
wellness of our people
We provide employees with access to leading
benefts and programs that help teammates be
well — physically, emotionally and fnancially.
It’s core to our values and to Responsible Growth, and we continue to evolve our benefts
and programs over time to meet teammates where they are in their careers and personal
lives. When our employees have the tools and resources to manage their life and career,
they can better deliver for our clients, communities and each other.

Physical wellness
To help our employees be physically well, we ofer health insurance plans that provide
access to virtual care, condition management and specialty programs and tools that help
employees prevent illness and maintain wellness.
COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL PLANS
Employees have plan options with three national carriers and prescription drug coverage.
We’ve also held medical plan premiums fat for the 10th year in a row for U.S. employees
earning less than $50,000 a year. For the sixth straight year, employees earning between
$50,000 and less than $100,000 saw premium increases below the national average.
TELADOC HEALTH AND 24/7 NURSE LINE
Employees have round-the-clock access to health care through our U.S. national medical
plans. More than 60,000 no-cost virtual medical and behavioral health consultations were
completed with Teladoc in 2022.

We’ve held medical
premiums fat for the
10th year in a row for
U.S. employees earning
less than $50,000 per
year, and preventive
prescription medications
are available to
employees at no cost.
FAMILY SUPPORT PROGRAM
This beneft ofers expert pregnancy,
adoption, fertility, infancy, egg freezing,
surrogacy and postpartum support at no
cost for new or future parents enrolled in
a national U.S. bank medical plan for up to
fve years afer welcoming a child.
CANCER SUPPORT
We partner with Memorial Sloan Kettering
in support of U.S. teammates who are
fghting cancer to help schedule expedited
appointments, coordinate care, recommend
a local facility and more. We also signed
on to the #WorkingWithCancer pledge to
afrm our support to create a more open,
recovery-forward culture at work for our
teammates with cancer.
GET ACTIVE! FITNESS CHALLENGE
In 2022, approximately 39,000 teammates
took nearly 9 billion steps and learned
more about the importance of physical
activity, nutrition, stress reduction and
sleep as a result of our annual program.
VACCINATION
Onsite vaccination clinics for fu and
coronavirus helped 25,000 teammates
maintain their health. We also provided up
to eight hours of paid time of to receive
a coronavirus vaccine or booster through
other venues.

25K

teammates attended onsite
vaccination clinics for fu
and coronavirus in 2022
44 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Emotional wellness
Helping our teammates be emotionally well
means providing resources to help handle
stress, manage conficts and adversity, and
deal with grief in positive, healthy ways.
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
We expanded in-person confdential
counseling through our Employee Assistance
Program by adding onsite benefts
counselors in some of our large locations.
We also doubled the number of free inperson confdential counseling sessions to
12, and expanded virtual options to provide
free unlimited, confdential 24/7 phone
access to specialists for counseling.
LIFE EVENT SERVICES (LES)
In 2022, LES supported teammates nearly
200,000 times in the moments that
mattered most, providing personalized
connections to resources by tapping
experts inside and outside the company
for assistance with signifcant events, such
as domestic violence, natural disasters,
terminal illness, retiring from the company,
survivor support and more.
SABBATICAL PROGRAM
Announced in 2022, our industry-leading
sabbatical program provides employees
the opportunity to take four to six weeks
additional paid time of beginning at
15 years of continuous service to recharge
and refocus as they best see ft.

Announced in 2022,
our industry-leading
sabbatical program
provides employees
the opportunity
to take 4-6 weeks
additional paid time
of beginning at 15
years of continuous
service to recharge
and refocus.

BACK-UP CHILDCARE AND ELDERCARE
We continued to provide 50 days of back-up childcare and eldercare when regular
arrangements aren’t available. This beneft provided more than 58,000 days of back-up
care — at a value of more than $13 million — for thousands of U.S. teammates.
PARENTAL LEAVE
We provide 26 weeks of parental leave for the birth or adoption of a child, 16 weeks of
which are fully paid for eligible teammates. Annually, we have more than 6,000 employees
take advantage of this time with a new family member.

50

days of back-up
childcare and
eldercare

26

weeks of parental leave
for the birth or adoption
of a child

RESILIENCY SKILLS
We continued to ofer additional resources from Thrive Global, including digital programs,
in-person training and daily guided mindfulness, with a goal of continuing to help our
teammates around the globe navigate evolving work and home routines.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 45

benefits overview

human capital management update

Financial wellness
Having fnancial wellness means
developing and maintaining good money
habits, planning for short-term and longterm expenses and setting aside savings
for goals or emergencies. We support
teammates in reaching fnancial wellness
with retirement savings plans and other
programs, and also provide access to selfguided tools and expert advice.

5%

matching 401(k)
contribution, plus 2%–3%
annual contribution

401(k)
We automatically enroll teammates into
the 401(k) plan to help with saving for
retirement. Based on service for eligible
U.S. teammates, we make an annual
contribution of 2%–3% and ofer matching
contributions of up to 5% of eligible pay.
FINANCIAL PLANNING TOOLS
We continue to ofer free fnancial planning
tools to help teammates plan for their
short- and long-term fnancial goals:
• Our Benefts Education & Planning Center
ofers personalized, confdential guidance
with an independent planner to help
teammates get the most out of their
employee benefts.
• The Financial Wellness Tracker helps
teammates assess their fnancial health
and provides personalized suggestions for
developing an action plan and connecting
with additional resources and guidance.
• Better Money Habits®, an educational
resource co-developed by our company,
helps teammates and community
members improve their fnancial wellness.

TUITION ASSISTANCE
We provided $17 million in tuition assistance for more than 5,000 teammates in 2022.
Employees are eligible to receive up to $7,500 per year to help with academic degrees or
certifcations, with the fexibility of payment through reimbursement or pre-paid voucher.
COLLEGE ADMISSIONS
We also ofer free, one-on-one expert college admissions coaching for teammates and
their children in school grades 8–12 to help plan for and navigate the college admissions
and fnancial aid process.
FAMILY PLANNING REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM
This program ofers teammates the fexibility to choose reimbursement for eligible
adoption, fertility and/or surrogacy expenses, up to a collective $20,000 lifetime maximum
over the course of their career at the company.

$20K

in collective reimbursement for eligible
adoption, fertility and/or surrogacy expenses
EMPLOYEE RELIEF FUND
In 2022, this program provided $5.7 million in grants to employees through the Employee
Relief Fund. The program provides employees up to $2,500 in relief per event for a
qualifed disaster and up to $5,000 for an unexpected emergency hardship. Employees
can receive up to $10,000 in total grants in a rolling 12-month period.
GLOBAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE PROGRAM
We provide a $4,000 reimbursement to eligible teammates purchasing a new all-electric
passenger vehicle or a $2,000 reimbursement for a new lease (or local currency equivalent).
In 2022, we provided more than 800 reimbursements totaling approximately $3.4 million.
Note: Specific programs vary by region. U.S. programs shown.

$17M

in tuition assistance
for more than 5K teammates

46 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

$5.7M

in grants paid from the
Employee Relief Fund

$4K

electric vehicle
purchase reimbursement

recognizing & rewarding performance

Recognizing & rewarding
teammate performance
Our pay-for-performance compensation approach
strives to recognize and reward performance with
competitive and fair pay for the work done, at all
levels of our company.
We have long been a leader in establishing a minimum rate of U.S. pay.
Making progress toward increasing our minimum hourly wage for U.S. employees to
$25 by 2025, we increased our minimum hourly pay to $22 in June 2022.
Based on our 2022 performance, we once again provided our teammates
Sharing Success compensation awards delivered in 2023. This is the sixth time
this award has been given since 2017, growing to a more than $4 billion investment in our
teammates. Approximately 96% of our employees have received or will receive an award
this year. Most awards are in the form of Bank of America common stock that vest over
four years, providing the opportunity to further share in our company’s long-term success.
These awards are in addition to our standard annual compensation and bonus awards.
We also maintain robust policies and practices that help reinforce equal pay
for equal work, including reviews with oversight from our Board and senior leaders.
For over 16 years, we have conducted rigorous processes and analyses with
outside experts to examine individual employee pay before year-end
compensation decisions are fnalized, and we adjust compensation
where appropriate.
In 2022, results of this equal pay for equal work review showed
that compensation received by women was on average more
than 99% of that received by men, and that compensation
received by people of color in the U.S. was on average
more than 99% of that received by non-people of
color employees.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 47

talent & development

human capital management update

Recruiting and developing
talented teammates
A key aspect of Responsible Growth is attracting
and retaining exceptional talent from around
the world.

In 2022, we believe we continued to drive
progress in the strength and diversity of
our employees:
ENTRY-LEVEL PROGRAMS
We expanded our outreach and onboarded
1,800 full-time campus hires, with 44%
women and 59% people of color.

This starts with how we recruit new teammates and extends to the many ways we support
their professional development and career growth once they’re here. That’s why we provide
a variety of resources to help teammates grow in their current roles and build new skills.

EDUCATION AND TRAINING
We contributed $9.6 million in 2022 to
50 national workforce training partners
and nearly $31 million toward programs
focused on increasing diverse talent in
high-growth areas.

Attracting exceptional talent

MILITARY HIRING
We hired more than 5,100 U.S. teammates
with a military background.

Building a strong pipeline of talent means fnding candidates who are committed to our
purpose and have a passion for serving our clients and communities. This spans programs
from entry-level hiring through more senior-level recruiting.
We partner with more than 450 universities across the globe to provide entry-level
opportunities through our campus program. To help our talent pipeline refect the
diversity of the communities we serve and support local economic vitality, we have
developed partnerships with nearly 30 Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) and Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), as well as 30 community colleges. We also
partner with many nonproft organizations to create pathways to employment —
including Road to Hire, Unidos, Urban Alliance and Year Up.

48 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

PATHWAYS
We are making progress on our
commitment to hire an additional 10,000
low- and moderate-income (LMI) hires by
2025, bringing the total to 20,000 LMI
hires. We surpassed our initial goal of
10,000 hires three years early.

Developing our workforce through
The Academy at Bank of America
Retaining talent is core to how our company drives Responsible
Growth, including our commitment to being a great place to work.
That’s why we’re investing in teammates’ career growth and
success through The Academy at Bank of America, our awardwinning onboarding, education and professional development
organization. We started The Academy in 2017 to support the
learning and development needs of our consumer banking
business. Over time, we’ve expanded our investment in The
Academy, which is now a core function of our Global Human
Resources organization, to ofer programs to all lines of business.
Employees can develop their skills for their current role or a role
they want to pursue in the future.
The Academy team is focused on world-class onboarding,
upskilling, high-tech and high-touch experiences, serving our
communities and furthering a culture of integrity. In 2022, The
Academy launched work to implement a consistent, simplifed and
improved onboarding experience available across the company
for new teammates and those moving into new positions. By
improving the overall onboarding experience, we drive connection
to our culture and values, create efciencies and reduce
operational risk.

We recognize that retaining
talent is core to how our company
drives Responsible Growth.

We value our teammates’ varied experiences and learning
styles. Through our personalized approach, we ofer learning
and development programs to help all teammates access the
resources they need to advance their careers. Our Learning
Marketplace provides tailored experiences for employees in each
line of business and support function, helping employees access
learning opportunities for their role, build industry knowledge and
enhance professional skills.
BROAD ENGAGEMENT
We engaged nearly 121,000 participants across the full range of
structured programs.
TRAINING SESSIONS
Our teammates completed more than 11 million training hours,
including our regulatory-required sessions.
NEW ROLE SUPPORT
We supported 36,000 employees who were new to their role,
50% of which were internal moves.
SIMULATION TRAINING
We delivered nearly 624,000 high-tech simulations through
immersive technology, such as virtual reality training, to help
teammates build profciency in their jobs and better serve clients.
COMMUNITY OUTREACH
We developed programs for nonproft partners to support our
communities, with a focus on fnancial literacy, career readiness,
skill-specifc learning and industry certifcations.

Investing in the growth of our leaders and managers
For our leaders and managers, we ofer a range of development
programs to help cultivate their skills. These programs provide
assessments, professional coaching and tactics to help leaders
progress in their careers and strengthen our leader pipeline for
future roles.
Our manager curriculum was created in response to employee
feedback and designed to build manager capabilities to lead their
teams more efectively to drive Responsible Growth. Launched in
2021, eight manager training modules were fully delivered in 2022
and have been well-received. The manager curriculum focuses on
what it means to be a successful manager at the company, from
championing diversity and inclusion to being a fnancial steward.
It culminates in a capstone experience that enables managers to
come together to integrate the eight manager expectations and
build an action plan to further their learning.

MANAGER CURRICULUM PARTICIPATION
About 90% of our managers have participated in at least
one module of the series, and nearly 60% of managers have
completed all eight modules.
MANAGER EXCELLENCE COMMUNITY
Community and monthly sessions continue to engage more than
20,000 managers through interactive conversations.
ONE-ON-ONE COACHING
Our Manager Excellence Consultants provide virtual or in-person
sessions to help managers build their skills and connect everyday
decisions to enterprise priorities.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 49

diversity & inclusion

human capital management update

Building a diverse and inclusive workplace
Our diversity — in thought, style,
gender, sexual orientation, gender
identity, race, ethnicity, culture,
religion, age, ability, military status
and experience — makes us stronger
and is essential for us to serve
our clients, fulfll our purpose and
drive Responsible Growth.
Commitment and accountability
Leadership at every level is engaged in, and accountable for,
driving diversity and inclusion. This includes our Board of Directors,
its committees and our CEO, who all play a key role in the
oversight of our culture, expecting management to be accountable
for ethical and professional conduct and our commitment to being
a great place to work.
Each management team member has business-specifc, actionoriented diversity goals that are included in their quarterly
business review process, talent planning and scorecards reviewed
by the Board. Management team members cascade these goals
to help drive accountability for diverse representation and an

inclusive culture across the company. Leaders understand that
making progress toward diversity and inclusion goals and metrics
is fundamental to managing their teams, and employees have
access to feedback channels to raise questions and share input.
Our Global Diversity & Inclusion Council sponsors and supports
business, operating unit, and regional diversity and inclusion councils
to help align to enterprise diversity strategies and goals. The global
council consists of senior executives from every line of business,
every region and our local markets, and has been chaired by
CEO Brian Moynihan since 2007 — he has never missed a meeting.

Continued progress
We believe the diversity of our management team refects the
progress we’ve made, with 55% diverse members, including seven
women, two Asian, two Black/African American and one HispanicLatino leaders. We have worked hard to help narrow the gaps
at leadership levels across the company, with improvements in
representation of Asian, Black/African American and Hispanic-Latino
teammates across key categories, such as management levels 1–3,
managers, executive/senior level and mid-level.
We invest in talent acquisition programs and community
partnerships to create a strong and diverse talent pipeline, which has
helped increase representation of women and people of color, and
advance racial equality and economic opportunity in communities.

Our latest measures show improvement in the diversity of our leadership, management and global workforce:

53%

55%

50%

33%

32%

50%

People of color in
executive/senior
level individual and
management positions
have increased by

Since 2015,
representation of people
of color in our top three
management levels has
increased

67%

73%.

of our Board is diverse,
including
women.

since 2015.

50 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

of our management
team is diverse, including
women.

of our global workforce
are women, and
of our U.S. workforce are
people of color.

Since 2009,
representation of people
of color in our campus
classes has increased

64%.

We’ve made strong progress against
our aspirational goal for our workforce to
mirror the clients and communities we serve
at all levels of the company.

An inclusive culture where teammates bring their
whole selves to work

Community partners
help build our expertise

Our focus on advancing diversity and inclusion is core to being a great place to work, and
it’s something we help drive across the communities we serve, as well. The partnerships we
forge with organizations around the world are helping address some of society’s biggest
challenges, and we’re able to share what we’re doing as a company with our teammates
to create dialogue, build knowledge and overcome challenges.

We work with nearly 200 external
partners — including NPower, Urban
Alliance, National Association of Black
Accountants, Association of Latino
Professionals for America, National
Association of Asian American
Professionals, Paradigm for Parity,
Hiring Our Heroes, Neurodiversity in the
Workplace, National Center for American
Indian Enterprise Development and Out
for Undergrad — and more than 600
colleges, universities and community
colleges, including HBCUs, HSIs and tribal
colleges — to identify diverse talent and
expand our impact.

Recruiting diverse talent
We also focus on recruiting military and
veterans, LGBTQ+ individuals and people
with disabilities. For example, we:
• Hired more than 5,100 individuals
with a military background — more
than 16% of all U.S. external hires for the
year.

In 2022, we continued our series of courageous conversations and inclusion learning and
development programs, providing teammates with opportunities to discuss topics central
to who we are, including racial equality, economic opportunity, gender, sexual orientation,
disability status, military service, mental health and more. The opportunities include:
• Let’s Get Real…®, courageous conversations on issues impacting our communities and
open dialogue to provide greater understanding and appreciation for one another
• myD&I Development Program, diversity and inclusion learning sessions for individual
contributors and employee network members
• Inclusion Manager Series, helping equip managers to better address bias and drive
inclusion deep within their teams
• Diversity & Inclusion Pathways, driving inclusion in the workplace and improving
individual cultural competency
• Executive development programs, including our Diverse Leader Sponsorship
Program, targeting diverse high-potential/top-performing leaders
We recognize cultural days and heritage observances that are meaningful for our
teammates, refecting the diversity of our communities and with the understanding
that knowledge of these holidays, celebrations and signifcant moments can strengthen
our diverse and inclusive culture.

• Attract and develop LGBTQ+ talent
through targeted partnerships with
organizations such as Out & Equal
Workplace Advocates, Lesbians Who Tech,
Trans Can Work and Reaching Out.
• Continue to expand our dedicated
Support Services team, a team of
more than 300 employees with cognitive
and developmental disabilities who work
with every line of business and function
across multiple locations.
• Invite employees to share more
about who they are through our
Count Me In program, including their
gender identity, sexual orientation, and
disability and military statuses, to help us
develop programs and benefits to meet
their diverse needs and drive our inclusive
culture.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 51

diversity & inclusion
Diversity Leadership Councils & Employee Networks

human capital management update

Our Diversity Leadership Councils and Employee Networks provide guidance and help enable employee
engagement, working to drive diverse representation, discuss strategies to improve advocacy, sponsorship
and retention, address unique obstacles to career advancement and grow client relationships.

DIVERSITY LEADERSHIP COUNCILS
• Black Executive Leadership Council
• Hispanic-Latino Executive Council
• Asian Advisory Council
• Investing in Women Council
• LGBTQ+ Executive Leadership Council
• Disability Advisory Council
• Military Advisory Panel

7

Diversity Leadership
Councils

52 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

EMPLOYEE NETWORKS
• Asian Leadership Network
• Black Professional Group
• Disability Action Network
• Hispanic/Latino Organization for
Leadership & Advancement
• Inter-Generational Employee Network

• Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and
Queer (LGBTQ+) Pride
• Military Support & Assistance Group
• Multicultural Leadership Network
• Native American Professional Network
• Parents and Caregivers Network

• LEAD (Leadership, Education, Advocacy
and Development) for Women

360

Employee Network
chapters

276K

Employee Network
memberships
worldwide

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 53

employee engagement & turnover

Employee engagement and turnover
More than 170,000 teammates shared ideas and feedback by
participating in our 2022 survey. Our Employee Engagement
Index score refects a strong trend over time — increasing
10 percentage points during the last decade. We also measure
an internal Diversity & Inclusion Index1 that gives us feedback on
how we measure inclusion at the company. It is up 8 percentage
points during the same time, and index scores are strong relative to
industry benchmarks over time.

Over the past decade, our turnover rate has been among the
lowest in the industry. In that time, we have experienced vastly
diferent labor markets, the pandemic and return to ofce.
With the tight labor market in 2022, we saw a slight increase
in turnover in the frst half of the year, and in the second half
dropped back to pre-pandemic record lows, resulting in a 13%
annualized turnover rate — a strong result for a company of
our size and scale.

The results of the survey and the process of continuous
improvement that ensues is discussed with the Board at least
annually. Our eforts refect our progress in being a great place to
work. We believe our employee turnover refects the strength of
our employee engagement results and how our teammates view
Bank of America as an employer of choice.

With our variety of resources and programs that support career
growth and development, we’re helping teammates have longterm careers with our company. We also continue to enhance our
internal mobility practices, which has led to nearly 45% of our
open roles being flled by internal candidates.

90%

91%

80%
70%

80%

76%

75%

88%

85%

82%

85%

20%

75%

60%

15%
15%

50%

15%

13%

14%
12%

40%

12%

12%

10%
11%

30%

7%

5%

20%
10%

0

0
2013

2014

2016

2017

2018

Employee Engagement Index Score

2019

2020

2021

2022

Turnover

¹ Our Diversity & Inclusion Index measures core areas like how comfortable teammates feel sharing different opinions without fear of negative consequences,
whether or not they feel they are being treated fairly, their impression of how well Bank of America has done in creating an environment where people of diverse
backgrounds can succeed and how Bank of America values the unique experiences our teammates bring to the workplace. Survey was not conducted in 2015.

54 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Turnover

Employee Engagement Index Score

human capital management update

Each year, our Employee Engagement Survey gathers the voice of teammates
across the company to shape and inform our work going forward.

workforce diversity metrics

Workforce diversity metrics
Board diversity¹

53% diverse

33% women

Management team diversity

55% diverse

32% women

Global workforce

50% women

50% POC2

Management levels 1–3

2015

2022

% change

Women

33%

42%

27%

People of color (POC)

15%

26%

73%

Asian

7%

11%

57%

Black / African American

4%

8%

100%

Hispanic / Latino

4%

6%

50%

2015

2022

% change

Women

42%

42%

0%

POC

32%

42%

31%

11%

14%

27%

8%

10%

25%

11%

16%

45%

Managers

Asian
Black / African American
Hispanic / Latino
EEO executive/senior level

2015

2022

% change

Women

32%

38%

19%

POC

15%

25%

67%

Asian

7%

11%

57%

Black / African American

4%

6%

50%

Hispanic / Latino

4%

6%

50%

2015

2022

% change

Women

49%

52%

6%

POC

33%

42%

27%

12%

12%

0%

9%

11%

22%

11%

16%

45%

Campus

2009

2022

% change

Women

32%

44%

38%

POC

36%

59%

64%

17%

25%

47%

Black / African American

9%

14%

56%

Hispanic / Latino

6%

16%

167%

EEO frst/mid-level

Asian
Black / African American
Hispanic / Latino

Asian

¹Includes women and people of color

² U.S. only

Note: CEO included in Board diversity stats
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 55

equal employment opportunity diversity statistics

human capital management update

Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
diversity statistics

2022 EEO (by number of teammates)
U.S. Employee Diversity in 2022

Hispanic/
Latino

Asian

Native
Hawaiian/
Other
Pacific
Islander

Two or
more
races

Total by
gender

Job category

Gender

Executive/Senior
level officials and
managers

Male

2,367

151

165

384

5

1

37

3,110

Female

1,431

152

123

186

2

2

27

1,923

Total

3,798

303

288

570

7

3

64

5,033

First/Mid-level
officials and
managers

Male

6,089

879

1,464

1,542

29

34

206

10,243

Female

6,361

1,497

1,911

1,100

50

35

220

11,174

Total

12,450

2,376

3,375

2,642

79

69

426

21,417

Professionals

Male

26,009

3,086

3,646

7,453

102

89

861

41,246

Technicians

Sales workers

Administrative
support
Operatives

Service workers

Female

14,242

3,317

2,550

5,242

95

76

535

26,057

Total

40,251

6,403

6,196

12,695

197

165

1,396

67,303

Male

561

271

199

512

5

7

37

1,592

Female

238

156

88

667

3

2

20

1,174

Total

799

427

287

1,179

8

9

57

2,766

Male

736

47

75

142

3

2

31

1,036

Female

373

37

57

89

3

4

14

577

Total

1,109

84

132

231

6

6

45

1,613

Male

8,920

3,950

6,990

1,848

106

104

763

22,681

18,025

11,148

14,851

4,066

231

208

1,400

49,929

Total

26,945

15,098

21,841

5,914

337

312

2,163

72,610

Male

56

68

21

37

0

1

3

186

Female

Female

18

40

23

14

1

0

1

97

Total

74

108

44

51

1

1

4

283

Male

18

3

2

0

0

0

0

23

7

0

2

0

0

0

0

9

25

3

4

0

0

0

0

32

Female
Total

Total

White

Black/
African
American

American
Indian/
Alaska
Native

Male

44,756

8,455

12,562

11,918

250

238

1,938

80,117

Female

40,695

16,347

19,605

11,364

385

327

2,217

90,940

Total

85,451

24,802

32,167

23,282

635

565

4,155

171,057

*EEO table does not include job categories in which the company does not have employees (craft workers, and laborers & helpers)

56 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

2022 employee training hours

2022 external hiring

Average training hours by segment
Per person
53
Women
55
People of color
61
Asian
42
Black/African American
62
Hispanic/Latino
73

% of hires by segment
Women
Men
People of color
Asian
Black/African American
Hispanic/Latino
% of hires by region
United States
Asia Pacifc
Europe, Middle East & Africa
Latin America
Canada

2022 employee turnover
48%
52%
62%
15%
20%
23%
73%
23%
3%
0%
0%

% of turnover by segment
Women
Men
People of color
Asian
Black/African American
Hispanic/Latino
% of turnover by region
United States
Asia Pacifc
Europe, Middle East & Africa
Latin America
Canada

13%
13%
14%
13%
14%
14%
13%
14%
9%
7%
17%

2022 EEO (by percentage of teammates)
U.S. Employee Diversity in 2022
American
Indian/
Alaska
Native

Native
Hawaiian/
Other
Pacific
Islander

White

Black/
African
American

Male

47.0%

3.0%

3.3%

7.6%

0.1%

0.0%

0.7%

61.8%

Female

28.4%

3.0%

2.4%

3.7%

0.0%

0.0%

0.5%

38.2%

Total

75.5%

6.0%

5.7%

11.3%

0.1%

0.1%

1.3%

First/Mid-level
officials and
managers

Male

28.4%

4.1%

6.8%

7.2%

0.1%

0.2%

1.0%

47.8%

Female

29.7%

7.0%

8.9%

5.1%

0.2%

0.2%

1.0%

52.2%

Total

58.1%

11.1%

15.8%

12.3%

0.4%

0.3%

2.0%

Professionals

Male

38.6%

4.6%

5.4%

11.1%

0.2%

0.1%

1.3%

61.3%
38.7%

Job category

Gender

Executive/Senior
level officials and
managers

Female

Technicians

Operatives

21.2%

4.9%

3.8%

7.8%

0.1%

0.1%

0.8%

9.5%

9.2%

18.9%

0.3%

0.2%

2.1%

Male

20.3%

9.8%

7.2%

18.5%

0.2%

0.3%

1.3%

57.6%
42.4%

8.6%

5.6%

3.2%

24.1%

0.1%

0.1%

0.7%

Total

28.9%

15.4%

10.4%

42.6%

0.3%

0.3%

2.1%

Male

45.6%

2.9%

4.6%

8.8%

0.2%

0.1%

1.9%

64.2%

Female

23.1%

2.3%

3.5%

5.5%

0.2%

0.2%

0.9%

35.8%

68.8%

5.2%

8.2%

14.3%

0.4%

0.4%

2.8%

Male

12.3%

5.4%

9.6%

2.5%

0.1%

0.1%

1.1%

31.2%

Female

24.8%

15.4%

20.5%

5.6%

0.3%

0.3%

1.9%

68.8%

Total

37.1%

20.8%

30.1%

8.1%

0.5%

0.4%

3.0%

Male

19.8%

24.0%

7.4%

13.1%

0.0%

0.4%

1.1%

65.7%
34.3%

Female

Service workers

Total

Total by
gender

59.8%

Total

Administrative
support

Asian

Two or
more
races

Total
Female

Sales workers

Hispanic/
Latino

6.4%

14.1%

8.1%

4.9%

0.4%

0.0%

0.4%

Total

26.1%

38.2%

15.5%

18.0%

0.4%

0.4%

1.4%

Male

56.3%

9.4%

6.3%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

71.9%
28.1%

Female

21.9%

0.0%

6.3%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Total

78.1%

9.4%

12.5%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Male

26.2%

4.9%

7.3%

7.0%

0.1%

0.1%

1.1%

46.8%

Female

23.8%

9.6%

11.5%

6.6%

0.2%

0.2%

1.3%

53.2%

Total

50.0%

14.5%

18.8%

13.6%

0.4%

0.3%

2.4%

*EEO table does not include job categories in which the company does not have employees (craft workers, and laborers & helpers)
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 57

financial highlights
Bank of America Corporation (NYSE: BAC) is headquartered in Charlotte, North Carolina. As of December 31, 2022, we operated across
the United States, its territories and more than 35 countries. Through our bank and various nonbank subsidiaries throughout the United
States and in international markets, we provide a diversifed range of banking and nonbank fnancial services and products through four
business segments comprising eight lines of business: Consumer Banking (includes Retail and Preferred Banking), Global Wealth &
Investment Management (includes Merrill and The Private Bank), Global Banking (includes Business Banking, Commercial Banking and
Global Corporate & Investment Banking) and Global Markets.
Financial highlights ($ in millions, except per share information)

miscellaneous & appendiX

For the year
Revenue, net of interest expense
Net income
Earnings per common share
Diluted earnings per common share
Dividends paid per common share
Return on average assets
Return on average common equity
Return on average tangible common shareholders’ equity¹
Eﬃciency ratio
Average diluted common shares issued and outstanding

2022
94,950
27,528
3.21
3.19
0.86
0.88%
10.75%
15.15
64.71
8,167

$

At year-end
Total loans and leases
Total assets
Total deposits
Total shareholders’ equity
Book value per common share
Tangible book value per common share¹
Market capitalization
Market price per common share
Common shares issued and outstanding
Common equity ratio
Tangible common equity ratio¹

2022
$ 1,045,747
3,051,375
1,930,341
273,197
30.61
21.83
264,853
33.12
7,997
8.0
5.9

Total Cumulative Shareholder Return²
Five-Year Period Ending December 31, 2022

2021
89,113
31,978
3.60
3.57
0.78
1.05%
12.23%
17.02
67.03
8,558

$

2020
85,528
17,894
1.88
1.87
0.72
0.67%
6.76%
9.48
64.55
8,797

$

2021
$ 979,124
3,169,948
2,064,446
270,066
30.37
21.68
359,383
44.49
8,078
7.7
5.7

2020
$ 927,861
2,819,627
1,795,480
272,924
28.72
20.60
262,206
30.31
8,651
8.8
6.5

BAC Five-Year Stock Performance
$60
$50
$40

$250

$30
$20
$10
$0

$200

$150

$100

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

HIGH

$32.84

$35.52

$35.64

$48.37

$49.38

LOW

22.73

24.56

18.08

29.65

29.77

CLOSE

24.64

35.22

30.31

44.49

33.12

Book Value Per Share/Tangible Book Value Per Share¹
$27.32

$25.13

$50
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

$100

$85

$124

$110

$164

$125

S&P 500

100

96

126

149

191

157

KBW Bank Sector Index

100

82

112

100

139

109

December 31
Bank of America
Corporation

$17.91

2018

$19.41

2019
Book Value Per Share

$30.37

$28.72
$20.60

2020

$21.68

2021

$30.61
$21.83

2022

Tangible Book Value Per Share

¹ Represents a non-GAAP financial measure. For more information on these measures and ratios, and a corresponding reconciliation to GAAP financial measures,
see Supplemental Financial Data on page 79 and Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 132 of the 2022 Financial Review section.
2

This graph compares the yearly change in the Corporation’s total cumulative shareholder return on its common stock with (i) the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index
and (ii) the KBW Bank Index for the years ended December 31, 2017 through 2022. The graph assumes an initial investment of $100 at the end of 2017 and the
reinvestment of all dividends during the years indicated.

58 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

recognition
We are honored to be recognized by organizations and media around the world for driving Responsible Growth for our clients,
teammates and communities.
In 2022, we were named World’s Best Bank by Euromoney, America’s Most JUST Company by JUST Capital and CNBC, and one of the
100 Best Companies to Work For by Fortune. Below is a summary of our most recent recognition.1
ASIA SOCIETY
Corporate Citizenship Award (2022)
BARRON’S
100 Most Sustainable Companies (2022, 2021, 2020)
Top 100 Women Advisors (2022)
recognized for 17 consecutive years
America’s Top 1,200 Financial Advisors (2022)
recognized for 14 consecutive years
BLOOMBERG
Gender-Equality Index (2023, 2022, 2021, 2020)
BRANDON HALL
23 Human Capital Management Excellence Awards
(2022)
COALITION GREENWICH
#1 Share Leader for U.S. Large Corporate Banking
(2022, 2021)
#1 Share Leader for U.S. Large Corporate Cash
Management (2022 — tied, 2021)
#1 Overall Digital Channels Module, Digital
Transformation Benchmarking Study
DAVE THOMAS FOUNDATION FOR ADOPTION
100 Best Adoption-Friendly Workplace
(2022, 2021, 2020)
DISABILITY:IN
Disability Equality Index (2022, 2021, 2020)
scored 100%
Named one of the best places for Disability Inclusion
(2022, 2021, 2020)
ENVIRONMENTAL FINANCE
Net Zero Progression of the Year — Americas (2022)
EQUILEAP
U.S. and Global Gender Equality Reports (2022, 2021)
EUROMONEY
World’s Best Bank (2022)
Best Bank in the U.S. (2022)
World’s Best Bank for Corporate Responsibility
(2021, 2020)
World’s Best Bank for Payments and Treasury
(2022, 2021)
Excellence in Leadership — North America (2020)
Best Digital Bank — North America (2020)
Best Bank for Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises — North America (2022)
recognized for seven consecutive years
Best Bank for Corporate Responsibility —
North America (2022, 2021)
Best Bank for Transaction Services —
North America (2022, 2021, 2020)
Best Bank for Transaction Services —
Latin America (2022)
Best Investment Bank — Latin America (2022, 2021)
Best Investment Bank — Colombia and Peru (2022)
FAMILY WEALTH REPORT
Best National and Regional Private Bank (2022)

FORBES
America’s Best Employers for Diversity (2022)
World’s Best Employers (2023, 2022, 2021)
World’s Top Female-Friendly Companies (2022, 2021)
America’s Best Employers for Veterans (2022, 2021)
America’s Best Large Employers (2023)
America’s Best Employers for New Grads (2022, 2021)
America’s Best Employers for Women (2022, 2021)

Certified Customer Service — Phone — Corporate,
Global Commercial and Business Banking contact
centers (2022) recognized for 13 consecutive years

FORTUNE
100 Best Companies to Work For (2022, 2021, 2020)
Best Large Workplaces for Women (2022, 2021, 2020)
Best Workplaces for Parents (2022) recognized for
6 consecutive years
Best Large Workplaces in Financial Services and
Insurance (2022, 2021, 2020)
Best Large Workplaces for Millennials (2022, 2021)
World’s Most Admired Companies (2023, 2022, 2021,
2020) first ranking Megabank in 2022

LATINA STYLE
Top 50 Best Companies for Latinas to Work For
in the U.S. (2022) recognized for 23 consecutive years
Top 15 Employee Resource Groups of the Year —
Hispanic/Latino Organization for Leadership &
Advancement (2022, 2021)

GLOBAL FINANCE MAGAZINE
Global Best Bank for Payments & Collections (2022)
Most Innovative Digital Bank — North America (2022)
Outstanding Innovations in Payments, Treasury and
Supply Chain Finance (2022)
Best Global Trade Finance FX (2023)
World’s Best Bank for Supply Chain Financing (2023)
Best Bank for Payments and Collections (2022)
Best Bank — North America (2022)
Overall Leader for North America in Sustainable
Finance (2022, 2021)
Best Bank for Payments and Collections — North
America (2023)
Best Bank in the United States (2022, 2021, 2020)
Best Consumer Digital Bank in the United States
(2022, 2021, 2020)
Best Private Bank for Digital (2023) and Philanthropy
(2023, 2022)
Best Bank for Treasury and Cash Management —
United States (2022)
GLOBAL PRIVATE BANKING
Best Private Bank — North America (2022)
HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN
Corporate Equality Index (2022, 2021) scored 100%
Named one of the Best Places to Work for LGBTQ+
Equality (2022, 2021)
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR
#2 Global Research Firm (2022)
J.D. POWER
Ranked #1 in U.S. Merchant Services Satisfaction
(2023, 2022)
Ranked #1 in U.S. Online Banking and U.S. Banking
Mobile App Satisfaction (2021)
Ranked #1 in U.S. Retail Banking Advice
Satisfaction (2021)
Certified Customer Service — Phone — Retirement
& Benefits contact center (2022) recognized for
18 consecutive years

JUST CAPITAL
Named #1 on America’s Most JUST Companies (2023)
Named to America’s Most JUST Companies (2022,
2021, 2020)
#1 Industry Leader — Banks (2023, 2022)

LINKEDIN
50 Top Companies in the U.S. (2022, 2021)
MILITARY TIMES
Best for Vets: Employers (2022, 2021, 2020)
NATIONAL LGBT CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Corporation of the Year (2022)
NEWSWEEK
America’s Greatest Workplaces for Diversity (2023)
PEOPLE MAGAZINE
Companies that Care (2022, 2021, 2020)
SERAMOUNT
(FORMERLY WORKING MOTHER MEDIA)
100 Best Companies (2022) recognized for
34 consecutive years
Best Companies for Multicultural Women (2022,
2021, 2020)
Best Companies for Dads (2022, 2021, 2020)
Top Companies for Executive Women (2022, 2021,
2020)
Inclusion Index (2022, 2021, 2020)
THE ASIAN BANKER
Best International Transaction Bank (2022)
THE BANKER
Transaction Banking — Best in Region for Latin
America (2022)
Transaction Banking — Best in Product Globally for
Supply Chain Finance (2022, 2021)
UNITED STATES HISPANIC CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE
Corporation of the Year (2022)
WOMEN’S BUSINESS ENTERPRISE NATIONAL
COUNCIL
Top Corporations for Women’s Business Enterprises
(2023) recognized for 12 consecutive award years

¹The recognitions referenced above represent awards given to various affiliates of Bank of America. Specific details around those awards can be provided by
visiting the websites of the companies that provided the awards or by visiting newsroom.bankofamerica.com/awards for further detail.
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 59

STAKEHOLDER CAPITALISM METRICS

miscellaneous & appendix

This index includes Bank of America Corporation’s (the Corporation) disclosures using the Stakeholder Capitalism Metrics
developed by the International Business Council (IBC) of the World Economic Forum and the Sustainability Accounting Standards
Board.* Separately we satisfy requirements of the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC). We believe this disclosure helps
to demonstrate how our sustainable business model drives progress towards inclusive capitalism and the U.N.’s Sustainable
Development Goals. In this index, we either reference existing disclosures or respond directly. We evaluate and select the metrics
we believe are most relevant to our business model and will continue to review. All reported data is as of and for year-end
December 31, 2022, unless otherwise noted. See page 70 for Cautionary Information and Forward-Looking Statements regarding
Stakeholder Capitalism Metrics.
INDICATES CORE IBC METRIC

Principles of Governance
THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Governing purpose

Setting Purpose: The company’s stated purpose, as the
expression of the means by which a business proposes
solutions to economic, environmental, and social issues.
Corporate purpose should create value for all stakeholders,
including shareholders.

How we operate to drive responsible growth as discussed in this
2022 Annual Report and our 2023 Proxy Statement articulates how
our purpose and Corporate Social Responsibility leadership creates
stakeholder value.
IBC

Purpose-led management: How the company’s stated purpose is
embedded in company strategies, policies, and goals.

Quality of governing body

Description of proxy voting and investee engagement policies
and procedures

Merrill Lynch and Merrill Private Wealth Management clients enrolled
in our investment advisory programs directly determine how to
vote their proxies. Through our investment advisory agreement,
clients may delegate proxy voting authority directly to institutional
shareholder services (ISS) or elect to vote proxies themselves. As part
of delegating to ISS, clients may, at their discretion, choose among the
ISS Benchmark, ISS Socially Responsible Investing, and ISS Catholic
proxy voting guidelines. Managed Account Advisors (MAA) and Merrill
Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith (MLPF&S) perform due diligence on ISS
to determine that it has the capacity and competency to adequately
analyze proxy issues and can make such voting recommendations in
an impartial manner and in the best interests of clients. For matters
over which ISS has a conflict or is otherwise unable to vote (called
Specified Investments), the proxy committee of MAA or MLPF&S, as
applicable, will have the authority to vote proxies in accordance with
its proxy voting policies and procedures. MAA or MLPF&S does not
assume proxy voting authority for securities except with respect to
Specified Investments. For proxies neither covered by ISS nor included
as Specified Investments, the client will retain the right to vote those
proxies. Generally, Bank of America The Private Bank (The Private
Bank) clients delegate authority to The Private Bank to vote proxies
on their behalf. The Private Bank has a fiduciary focused proxy voting
policy and custom guidelines and employs Glass Lewis to execute the
votes. For investment management accounts where The Private Bank
is not the trustee or other named fiduciary, clients may delegate proxy
authority directly to Glass Lewis (or other proxy advisor as determined
by The Private Bank) via their investment advisory agreement, as
described above. Clients may also withhold this delegation and vote
themselves if they choose to do so.
SASB: FN-AC-410a.3

Governing Body Composition: Composition of the highest
governance body and its committees by: competencies relating
to economic, environmental, and social topics; executive or
non-executive; independence; tenure on the governance body;
number of each individual’s other significant positions and
commitments and the nature of the commitments; gender;
membership of underrepresented social groups and stakeholder
representation.

Refer to “Proposal 1: Electing directors” in our 2023 Proxy
Statement on the Bank of America Investor Relations website at
www.bankofamerica.com/investor.
IBC
SASB.FN-AC-330a.1
SASB.FN-IB-330a.1

*In August 2022, the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Foundation assumed responsibility for SASB Standards. These standards are expected
to be replaced by IFRS Sustainability Disclosure Standards in the future.

60 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

THEME
Quality of governing body
(continued)

Ethical behavior

Customer treatment

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Progress against strategic milestones: Disclosure of the material
strategic economic, environmental, and social milestones
expected to be achieved in the following year, such milestones
achieved from the previous year, and how those milestones are
expected to or have contributed to long-term value.

Refer to our 2022 Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
report (www.bankofamerica.com/TCFD) for our financed emissions
targets, operational environmental performance and other goals;
and other highlights from this Annual Report for details on our
$1.5 trillion Sustainable Finance commitment. Since June 2020, we
have committed $760 million against our incremental $1.25 billion
commitment to racial equality and economic opportunity including
jobs, affordable housing, small business success and health. We also
continued progress toward our $15 billion Community Homeownership
Commitment, helping 39,000 low- and moderate-income people
purchase a home. Additionally, we have issued three $2 billion Equality
Progress Sustainability Bonds, the use of proceeds from which are
designed to advance racial and gender equality, economic opportunity
and environmental sustainability.

Remuneration:
1. How performance criteria in the remuneration policies relate to
the highest governance body’s and senior executives’ objectives
for economic, environmental and social topics, as connected to
the company’s stated purpose, strategy and long-term value.
2. Remuneration policies for the highest governance body and
senior executives for the following types of remuneration:
Fixed pay and variable pay, including performance-based pay,
equity-based pay, bonuses, and deferred or vested shares, Signon bonuses or recruitment incentive payments, termination
payments, clawback and retirement benefits.

Refer to the “Compensation discussion and analysis” section in our
2023 Proxy Statement available on the Bank of America Investor
Relations website at www.bankofamerica.com/investor.

Anti-corruption:
1. Total percentage of governance body members, employees
and business partners who have received training on the
organization’s anti-corruption policies and procedures, broken
down by region.
2. (a) Total number and nature of incidents of corruption
confirmed during the current year but related to previous
years and
(b) Total number and nature of incidents of corruption
confirmed during the current year, related to this year.
3. Discussion of initiatives and stakeholder engagement to
improve the broader operating environment and culture, in
order to combat corruption.

1. 100% of Bank of America employees are required to take
training on anti-bribery and anti-corruption policies as part of
Bank of America’s Code of Conduct training.
2. For disclosure of certain legal proceedings, see Note 12 —
Commitments and Contingencies, starting on page 180 of the
2022 Financial Review found at www.bankofamerica.com/investor.
bankofamerica.com/annual-reports-and-proxy-statements.
3. Refer to page 21 of our Code of Conduct available at
www.bankofamerica.com/investor.
IBC

Protected ethics advice and reporting mechanisms: A description of
internal and external mechanisms for:
1. Seeking advice about ethical and lawful behaviour and
organizational integrity
2. Reporting concerns about unethical or lawful behaviour and
organizational integrity
SASB: Description of approach to ensuring professional
integrity, including duty of care

Refer to page 17 of our Code of Conduct available on the Bank of
America Investor Relations website at www.bankofamerica.com/
investor.
Refer to our Code of Conduct for further information on professional
integrity. Additionally, refer to the Our company section of the
Corporation’s website, in particular the responsible growth and our
Business practices sections.
IBC
SASB.FN-AC-270a.1; SASB.FN-AC-510a.2; SASB.FN-CB-510a.2
SASB.FN-CF-270a.1; SASB.FN-IB-510a.2; SASB.FN-MF-270a.1

Monetary losses from unethical behaviour: Total amount of
monetary losses as a result of legal proceedings associated
with: fraud, insider trading, anti-trust, anti-competitive
behaviour, market manipulation, malpractice, or violations of
other related industry laws or regulations.

For disclosure of certain legal proceedings, see Note 12 —
Commitments and Contingencies on page 180 of the 2022 Financial
Review.
IBC

Alignment of strategy and policies to lobbying: The significant
issues that are the focus of the company’s participation in
public policy development and lobbying; the company’s strategy
relevant to these areas of focus; and any differences between
its lobbying positions, purpose, and any stated policies, goals
or other public positions.

Refer to our Political Activities disclosure available on the Bank of
America Investor Relations website at www.bankofamerica.com/
investor.
IBC

Description of whistleblower policies and procedures

Refer to our Code of Conduct available at www.bankofamerica.com/
investor for policies and procedures related to reporting ethical
misconduct.
SASB: FN-CB-510A. 2, FN-I B -510A. 2, FN-AC-510A. 2

Transparent Information & Fair Advice for Customers: Description
of approach to informing customers about products and
services

Refer to the What we Offer page within the Our company section
of our website for the Corporation’s approach to serving its clients.
Further, refer to our Responsible Growth section within the Our
company section of our website to read about how our Corporation
is a simpler, more efficient company that combines two crucial areas:
growing the economy while creating tangible value for our business,
our clients and the communities we serve.
SASB: FN-AC-270a.3

IBC

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 61

miscellaneous & appendix

THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Risk and opportunity
oversight

Integrating risk and opportunity into business process: Company
risk factor and opportunity disclosures that clearly identify
the principal material risks and opportunities facing the
company specifically (as opposed to generic sector risks), the
company appetite in respect of these risks, how these risks
and opportunities have moved over time and the response to
those changes. These opportunities and risks should integrate
material economic, environmental, and social issues, including
climate change and data stewardship.

Refer to the Bank of America Environmental and Social Risk Policy
Framework available at www.bankofamerica.com/ESRPF.
IBC
SASB.FN-AC-550a.1; SASB.FN-AC-550a.2
SASB.FN-AC-550a.3; SASB.FN-AC-550a.4
SASB.FN-CB-230a.1; SASB.FN-CB-230a.2
SASB.FN-CB-550a.1; SASB.FN-CB-550a.2
SASB.FN-CF-230a.1; SASB.FN-CF-230a.3
SASB.FN-IB-550a.1; SASB.FN-IB-550a.2
SASB.FN-MF-450a.1; SASB.FN-MF-450a.2; SASB.FN-MF-450a.3

Economic, environmental, and social topics in capital allocation
framework: How the highest governance body considers
economic, environmental, and social issues when overseeing
major capital allocation decisions, such as expenditures,
acquisitions and divestures

Bank of America’s Board of Directors (the Board) oversees the
development and execution of the Corporation’s strategic direction.
The Board oversees the execution of that strategy through regular
engagement with Corporation leadership, including through
management reports evaluating future opportunities and risks and
monitoring how the Corporation’s direction and decisions align to the
four tenets of responsible growth.
Responsible growth has four straightforward tenets, including “we
must grow in a sustainable manner.” Bank of America focuses on
responsible growth by: (1) sharing its success with the communities
it serves, including through its wide-ranging ESG activities; (2) being
a great place to work for its teammates; and (3) driving operational
excellence so that it can continue to invest in its employees and
capabilities.

Data security

Description of approach to identifying and addressing data
security risks

Refer to our Information Security and Privacy Policies available on the
Governance page of our corporate website and the Compliance and
Operational Risk Management section on pages 127-128 of the 2022
Financial Review for detail on our approach to data security risks.
SASB: FN-CB-230a.2; FN-CF-230a.3

Systemic risk management

Global Systemically Important Bank (G-SIB) score, by category

Our G-SIB surcharge is 2.5%. Refer to the Regulatory Capital
subsection on page 97 of the 2022 Financial Review for further detail.
Additionally, refer to our Banking Organization Systematic Risk Report
FR Y-15 filing for further information that factors into our calculation.
SASB: FN-CB-550a.1; FN-IB-550a.1

Description of approach to incorporation of results of mandatory
and voluntary stress tests into capital adequacy planning, longterm corporate strategy, and other business activities

We conduct various scenario analyses, included as part of the
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) stress tests, as
well as our resolution and recovery planning. For more information,
see the Corporation-wide Stress Testing section on page 95 and the
Capital Management section on page 96 of the 2022 Financial Review.
SASB: FN-CB-550a.2; FN-IB-550a.2

Stakeholder
engagement

Material issues impacting stakeholders: A list of the topics that
are material to key stakeholders and the company, how the
topics were identified, and how the stakeholders were engaged.

Stakeholders are engaged in part through our National Community
Advisory Council (NCAC), a forum made of senior leaders from social
justice, consumer advocacy, community development, environmental
and research organizations who provide external perspectives,
guidance and feedback on our business policies and practices. Refer to
our ESG Materiality disclosure available at www.bankofamerica.com/
ESGMateriality for more information.
IBC

Incorporation of
environmental, social, and
governance factors in credit
analysis

Commercial and industrial credit exposure, by industry

Refer to the Industry Concentrations subsection on pages 115-116 of
the 2022 Financial Review for additional information.
SASB: FN-CB-410a.1

Description of approach to incorporation of environmental,
social, and governance (ESG) factors in credit analysis, in
investment banking and brokerage activities and in wealth
management processes and strategies

Refer to the Bank of America Corporation Environmental and Social
Risk Policy Framework at www.bankofamerica.com/ESRPF for
information on our approach to incorporating ESG factors into our risk
management activities.
SASB: FN-CB-410a.2; FN-IB-410a.3; FN-AC-410a.2

(1) Number and (2) total value of investments and loans
incorporating integration of environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) factors, by industry

Refer to page 14 of the ESG Performance Data Summary available
at www.bankofamerica.com/ESGdata2021 for more information on
our investment in Economic and Social Progress and Environmental
Sustainability.
SASB: FN-IB-410a.2

Amount of assets under management, by asset class, that
employ (1) integration of environmental, social, and governance
(ESG) issues, (2) sustainability themed investing, and (3)
screening

As of December 31, 2022, Bank of America had $45.5 billion of client
balances in Sustainable & Impact Investments which we define as
investment strategies that intentionally integrate environmental,
social or governance factors in order to avoid harm by reducing
negative social or environmental effects or managing risk by limiting
certain exposures, benefit stakeholders by supporting positive social
or environmental practices, or contribute to solutions that address
specific and measurable sustainability outcomes or impact.
SASB FN-AC-410a.1

62 | BANK OF AMERIC A 2022

THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Customer privacy

Number of account holders whose information is used for
secondary purposes

Bank of America is committed to collecting, using and sharing personal
information responsibly. Refer to www.bankofamerica.com/privacy
for information on how we process personal information and choices
customers have to control the use and sharing of their personal
information.
SASB: FN-CF-220a.1

Planet*
THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Climate change

Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions: For all relevant greenhouse
gases (e.g. carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, F-gases
etc.), report in metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent
(tCO2e) GHG Protocol Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions.
Estimate and report material upstream and downstream (GHG
Protocol Scope 3) emissions where appropriate.

Bank of America’s 2021 greenhouse gas emissions (tCO2e) are set
forth below. Since 2010, we have reduced location-based emissions
60% globally. For more information, refer to our ESG Performance
Data Summary (2021) available at www.bankofamerica.com/
ESGData2021.

TCFD implementation: Fully implement the recommendations
of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
(TCFD). If necessary, disclose a timeline of at most three years
for full implementation. Disclose whether you have set, or have
committed to set GHG emissions targets that are in line with
the goals of the Paris Agreement — to limit global warming to
well-below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursue efforts
to limit warming to 1.5°C — and to achieve net-zero emissions
before 2050.

In 2022, Bank of America released its second Task Force on Climaterelated Financial Disclosures (TCFD) Report which included financed
emissions baseline data for three sectors. More information is available
at www.bankofamerica.com/TCFD and www.bankofamerica.com/
NetZero.
IBC

Paris-aligned GHG emissions targets: Define and report progress
against time-bound science-based GHG emissions targets
that are in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement – to
limit global warming to well-below 2°C above pre-industrial
levels and pursue efforts to limit warming to 1.5°C. This should
include defining a date before 2050 by which you will achieve
net-zero greenhouse gas emissions and interim reduction
targets based on the methodologies provided by the Science
Based Targets initiative if applicable.

Building on our history of climate leadership, we are working towards
2030 targets for our operations and supply chain. Our Net Zero before
2050 goal includes operations, supply chain and financing activities
(i.e., Scope 1, Scope 2 and material Scope 3). As a next step in our path
to achieve Net Zero, we published our Approach to Zero™ strategy
in 2022, outlining our 2030 science-aligned targets for reducing
emissions associated with financing activities for three key sectors:
Auto Manufacturing, Energy and Power Generation. These targets
were set using the International Energy Agency’s Net Zero 2050 1.5°
aligned scenario. We published our baseline (2019) and latest available
(2020) emissions for these three portfolios in our 2022 TCFD report.
For more information, refer to www.bankofamerica.com/NetZero, our
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures Report (www.
bankofamerica.com/TCFD) and ESG Performance Data Summary
(www.bankofamerica.com/ESGdata2021).
IBC

Impact of Greenhouse gas emissions: Report wherever material
along the value chain (GHG protocol scopes 1,2&3), the valued
societal impact of greenhouse gas emissions. Disclose the
estimate of the social/societal cost of carbon used and the
source or basis for this estimate.

The societal impact of Bank of America’s Scope 1, Scope 2 (location­
based), and Scope 3 (Categories 1-7, 9, 11-12) emissions in 2021 was
estimated to be $183 million. This figure was calculated using the
EPA’s 2020 social cost of carbon of $51/metric ton CO2 (3% discount
rate, reported in 2020 USD).
IBC

• Scope 1 Direct: 57,076
• Location-based Scope 2 Indirect: 601,906
• Market-Based Scope 2 Indirect: 13,886
• Total net Scope 1 and Market-Based Scope 2: 0
• Scope 3 Purchased Goods and Services: 1,436,100
• Scope 3 Capital Goods: 46,183
• Scope 3 Fuel- and Energy-Related Activities: 141,748
• Scope 3 Upstream Transportation and Distribution: 124,780
• Scope 3 Waste (Traditional Disposal): 11,757
• Scope 3 Business Travel: 18,822
• Scope 3 Net Business Travel: 18,822
• Scope 3 Employee Commuting: 144,625
• Scope 3 Downstream Transportation and Distribution: 1,000,000
• Scope 3 Use of Sold Products: 3,000
• Scope 3 End of Life Treatment of Sold Products: 9,000
IBC

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 63

miscellaneous & appendix

THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Fresh water
availability

Water consumption and withdrawal in water-stressed areas: Report
for operations where material, mega litres of water withdrawn,
mega litres of water consumed and the percentage of each
in regions with high or extremely high baseline water stress
according to WRI Aqueduct water risk atlas tool. Estimate and
report the same information for the full value chain (upstream
and downstream) where appropriate.

In 2021, Bank of America withdrew 6,325 and consumed 1,492
megaliters of water across our global operations. Withdrawals include
all of the water we use per year, including some reclaimed water.* We
consider our irrigation water use as our water consumption. 41% of
our withdrawals and 46% of our consumption were from regions with
high or extremely high baseline water stress according to the WRI
Aqueduct Water Risk Atlas tool.
IBC

Nature loss

Land use and ecological sensitivity: Report the number and area
(in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed in or adjacent
to protected areas and/or key biodiversity areas (KBA).

In 2021, Bank of America had 10 active U.S. sites that intersected
with areas protected for biodiversity. The area of these buildings is
approximately 7,120 square meters. Only U.S. sites are included in
this analysis. U.S. sites make up over 90% of Bank of America’s real
estate footprint. Sites were overlaid on the U.S. Geological Survey’s
Protected Areas Database to understand intersection with protected
areas.
IBC

Air pollution

Air pollution: Report wherever material along the value chain:
Nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulphur oxides (SOx), particulate matter
and other significant air emissions. Wherever possible, estimate
the proportion of specified emissions that occur in or adjacent
to urban/densely populated areas.

Bank of America’s 2021 air pollution emissions (metric tons) are set
forth below. These air pollution emissions are from all of our sites
globally and are not specific to urban/densely populated areas. For
more information, refer to our ESG Performance Data Summary (2021)
available at www.bankofamerica.com/ESGData2021.
• SOx: 1
• NOx: 19
• Carbon Monoxide (CO): 27
• Volatile Organic Compound (VOC): 2
• Particulate Matter (PM): 3
IBC

Environmental risk to
mortgaged properties

Impact of air pollution: Report wherever material along the value
chain, the valued impact of air pollution, including nitrogen
oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), particulate matter and other
significant air emissions.

The valued impact of Bank of America’s air pollution (SOx, NOx, CO,
VOCs, and PM) in 2021 was estimated to be $134,000. This figure was
calculated using the social cost factors of each pollutant as reported
in the World Resources Institute’s Transport Emissions & Social Cost
Assessment Tool v1.0. These social cost factors are weighted averages
based on a research process that merges the findings of independent
academic studies to calculate an overall or “absolute” effect.
IBC

(1) Number and (2) value of mortgage loans in 100-year flood
zones.

As of December 31, 2022, the Corporation had 40,399 loans with a
book value of $11.8 billion in 100-year flood zones according to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) definition.
SASB: FN-MF-450a.1

(1) Total expected loss and (2) Loss Given Default (LGD)
attributable to mortgage loan default and delinquency due to
weather related natural catastrophes, by geographic region.

The Corporation currently does not have a process in place to
estimate future losses specific to natural catastrophes. We have
monitored natural disasters in the last few years and given our
robust insurance requirements, client selection process and portfolio
asset quality (borrower’s equity), we have experienced no material
losses. We understand this may change based on severity and
location of future events. Refer to the Climate Risk Management
subsection on page 128 of the 2022 Financial Review for additional
information. See our Task Force on Climate-related Financial
Disclosures (www.bankofamerica.com/TCFD) report for details on
scenario analysis and stress testing.
SASB: FN-MF-450a.2

Description of how climate change and other environmental
risks are incorporated into mortgage origination and
underwriting.

Recognizing that certain sectors are more sensitive to climate-related
and environmental risks, we undertake enhanced due diligence to
analyze lending activities in these sectors to evaluate the associated
credit risks. Evaluation of environmental matters may include land
and water use impacts, a remediation/reclamation track record
(if applicable), climate risk reporting, community and stakeholder
engagement and overall transparency. For acute physical risk, which
are event-driven extreme weather events such as cyclones, hurricanes,
or floods, the Corporation follows Federal flood insurance regulations
and the industry’s mortgage hazard insurance (including fire/wind
coverage) during underwriting. Flood insurance requirements are based
on flood zones determined by FEMA. Insurance coverage amounts
require replacement value of property with policy parameters following
industry standards for minimum/maximum.
SASB: FN-MF-450a.3

*Water that is reclaimed from a variety of sources then treated and reused for beneficial purposes such as irrigation and groundwater reclamation.

64 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Prosperity
THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Employment and wealth
generation

Absolute number and rate of employment:
1. Total number and rate of new employee hires during the
reporting period, by age group, gender, other indicators of
diversity and region.
2. Total number and rate of employee turnover during the
reporting period, by age group, gender, other indicators of
diversity and region.

In 2022, turnover was up slightly from 2021, and attrition rates
at Bank of America are consistent across all genders. For more
information, refer to the Human Capital Management section of this
Annual Report.
IBC
SASB.FN-IB-550b.1; SASB.FN-IB-550b.2; SASB.FN-IB-550b.3

Economic Contribution:
1. Direct economic value generated and distributed
(EVG&D) — on an accrual basis, covering the basic components
for the organization’s global operations, ideally split out by:
a. Revenue
b. Operating Costs
c. Employee wages and benefits
d. Payments to providers of capital
e. Payments to government
f. Community Investment
2. Financial assistance received from the government — Total
monetary value of financial assistance received by the
organization from any government during the reporting period.

1a–d. Refer to Financial Statements and Notes beginning on page 133
of the 2022 Financial Review.
1e. Refer to Total Tax Paid metric below.
1f. 2022 Total philanthropic giving was $360 MM
2. No financial assistance received from the government; the
Corporation does not consider income tax credits to be applicable.
See the Corporation’s response for the Total Tax Paid metric below
for more information.
IBC

Wealth creation and
employment

Financial investment contribution disclosure:
1. Total capital expenditures (CapEx) minus depreciation
supported by narrative to describe the company’s investment
strategy.
2. Share buybacks plus dividend payments supported by
narrative to describe the company’s strategy for returns of
capital to shareholders.

1. Bank of America’s current investment strategy heavily prioritizes
its technology and real estate infrastructure. The Corporation invests
annually to improve operational efficiencies for the Corporation
and innovate for our customers. We continue to invest in projects
to achieve Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
certification throughout our real estate footprint, including efficiency,
solar energy and modernization of our financial center network.
Sustainable investments also include the transition to an electric
vehicle fleet.
2. For more information outlining our return of capital to shareholders,
see Note 13 — Shareholders’ Equity on page 184 of the 2022 Financial
Review.
IBC

Community and
social vitality

Total tax paid: The total global tax borne by the company,
including corporate income taxes, property taxes, noncreditable VAT and other sales taxes, employer-paid payroll
taxes and other taxes that constitute costs to the company,
by category of taxes.

IBC
The table set forth below reflects the approximate amount of each
category of tax paid by the Corporation globally. U.S. income tax law
provides investors in affordable housing projects, renewable energy
projects and other activities that further ESG principles and important
societal goals with credits that can reduce income taxes otherwise
owed. The amount shown in the table for Corporate Income Taxes
paid would have been approximately $3.5 billion higher were it not for
these credits, reflecting our support of these projects and activities.

Global Tax Paid in 2022 ($ in billions)
Corporate Income Taxes
Property Taxes
Non-creditable Value-added Tax (VAT) and Other Sales Taxes
Employer-paid Payroll Taxes
Other Taxes
Total
Innovation in better
products and services

Total R&D expenses ($): Total costs related to research and
development.
Innovation is key to prosperity and total costs relating to
R&D can be regarded as a basic indication of a company’s
efforts to innovate new products and services and be fit for
the future. This can also provide insights into the capacity
of the company to create new offerings, generate social or
environmental benefits and more detailed specific disclosure
could demonstrate progress against the SDGs.

2.3
0.2
0.4
1.9
0.9
5.7

Given the nature of the Corporation’s work and our mission to deliver
responsible growth to our stakeholders, Bank of America heavily
invests in software development through R&D. We do this in the spirit
of innovation, operational excellence, product improvement, security,
and regulatory compliance.
While R&D expenses are indicative of the Corporation’s investment
in innovation and producing better products and services for their
clients, it is not the only way to measure the Corporation’s efforts to
be fit for the future. We continue to mobilize financing toward our
$1.5 trillion Sustainable Finance commitment to advance a low-carbon
economy. Refer to this Annual Report and www.bankofamerica.com/
ESGdata2021 for more information.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 65

miscellaneous & appendix

THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Financial inclusion

(1) Number and (2) amount of loans outstanding qualified to
programs designed to promote small business and community
development

We extended approximately $9 billion in low- to moderate-income
(LMI) loans to small businesses in 2022. Refer to pages 10-12 of our
2021 Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) Performance Data
Summary for more information on small business and community
support available at www.bankofamerica.com/ESGData2021
SASB: FN-CB-240a.1
SASB: FN-CB-240a.2

Number of no-cost retail checking accounts provided to
previously unbanked or underbanked customers

As of year-end 2022, we had 4.6 million SafeBalance Banking
accounts. SafeBalance, a no overdraft fee account, is a low-cost
deposit service provided to our customers and Bank On certified since
2017. Students under age 25 are eligible for a waiver of the monthly
maintenance fee.
SASB: FN-CB-240a.3

Number of participants in financial literacy initiatives for
unbanked, underbanked, or underserved customers

We provide financial literacy to all of our customers through the Better
Money Habits financial education platform. Better Money Habits is
a resource that helps individuals and families build know-how on
topics ranging from budgeting and saving to home ownership and
retirement — designed for the way people want to learn today. In
2022, this platform was accessed approximately 7.4 million times.
SASB: FN-CB-240a.4

People
THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Dignity and equality

Diversity and inclusion (%): Percentage of employees per
employee category, per age group, gender and other indicators
of diversity (e.g. ethnicity).
Percentage of gender and racial/ethnic group representation
for (1) executive management, (2) non-executive management,
(3) professionals, and (4) all other employees

Refer to the Human Capital Management section of this Annual Report.
IBC
SASB: FN-I B -330A. 1, FN-AC-330A. 1

Pay equality: Ratio of the basic salary and remuneration for each
employee category by significant locations of operation for
priority areas of equality: women to men; minor to major ethnic
groups; and other relevant equality areas.
SASB: Percentage of total remuneration that is variable
for Material Risk Takers (MRTs); Percentage of variable
remuneration of Material Risk Takers (MRTs) to which malus or
clawback provisions were applied; Discussion of policies around
supervision, control, and validation of traders’ pricing of Level 3
assets and liabilities

Refer to the Equal Pay for Equal Work Section in our 2023 Proxy
Statement available on the Bank of America Investor Relations website
at www.bankofamerica.com/investor.
We conduct rigorous analysis with outside experts to examine
individual employee pay before year-end compensation decisions are
finalized adjusting compensation where appropriate. The results of our
equal pay for equal work review are disclosed in the Proxy Statement.
Our analysis focuses on total compensation and includes geographies
where we have significant operations for women and covers the U.S.
for people of color.
SASB answers: Variable incentive remuneration awards (both annual
and deferred) are subject to distinct features that can result in the
cancellation of awards or clawback of prior payments in the event
of certain detrimental conduct or financial losses. We believe these
features encourage appropriate behavior and manage risk in our
compensation program. For individual Material Risk Takers in the
Investment Bank & Brokerage sector, 100% of deferred variable
compensation is subject to clawback. For 2022 compensation,
approximately 76% of total remuneration was variable, of which 67%
was deferred and therefore subject to clawback.
Refer to the Complex Accounting Estimates section on pages 129-131
and Notes 1 and 20 of the 2022 Financial Review on pages 141-149
and 195-204.
IBC
SASB: FN-IB -550b.1, FN-I B -550b.2, FN-I B -550b.3

66 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

THEME

METRIC/QUESTION

RESPONSE/FRAMEWORK ALIGNMENT

Dignity and equality
(continued)

Wage level (%):
1. Ratios of standard entry-level wage by gender compared to
local minimum wage
2. Ratio of CEO’s total annual compensation to median total
annual compensation of all employees (excluding the CEO)

1. We are an industry leader in establishing an internal minimum rate
of pay above all mandated minimums for our U.S. hourly teammates,
and have made regular increases over the past several years. Our
minimum hourly wage for U.S. teammates was raised to $22 in 2022,
building toward $25 per hour by 2025.
We compare our average U.S. hourly pay and benefits to living wage
standards utilizing Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Living
Wage Calculator. The Living Wage calculator is a market based
approach that measures the basic needs of a family including items
such as food, childcare, health insurance and housing costs. We are
above the living wage for a family in all of our U.S. markets when we
consider our average hourly pay plus benefits in alignment with the
living wage definition.
2. Refer to the section entitled “CEO pay ratio” in our 2023 Proxy
Statement available on the Bank of America Investor Relations website
at www.bankofamerica.com/investor.
IBC

Risk for incidents of child, forced or compulsory labor: An
explanation of the operations and suppliers considered to have
significant risk for incidents of child labor, forced or compulsory
labor. Such risks could emerge in relation to type of operation
(such as manufacturing plant) and type of supplier; or countries
or geographic areas with operations and suppliers considered
at risk.

Refer to our Modern Slavery Act Statement, available at www.
bankofamerica.com/ModernSlaveryAct, which is updated annually.
IBC

Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
at Risk (%):
1. Percentage of active workforce covered under collective
bargaining agreements
2. An explanation of the assessment performed on suppliers
for which the right to freedom of association and collective
bargaining is at risk including measures taken by the
organization to address these risks.

1. No U.S.-based employees are subject to collective bargaining
agreements.
2. We do not currently conduct this assessment.

Human rights

Human rights review, grievance impact & modern slavery (#, %)
1. Total number and percentage of operations that have been
subject to human rights reviews or human rights impact
assessments, by country.
2. Number and type of grievances reported with associated
impacts related to a salient human rights issue in the reporting
period and an explanation on type of impacts.
3. Number and percentage of operations and suppliers
considered to have significant risk for incidents of child labour,
forced or compulsory labour. Such risks could emerge in
relation to:
a) type of operation (such as manufacturing plant) and type of
supplier; and
b) countries or geographic areas with operations and suppliers
considered at risk.

3. 320, or 7% of our suppliers are in industries which are considered
to have risk for incidents of child labour, forced or compulsory
labour. For more information on how we address suppliers in these
industries, refer to our Modern Slavery Act Statement available at
www.bankofamerica.com/ModernSlaveryAct. Our Human Rights
statement and Supplier Code of Conduct also outline our position
on human rights.
IBC

Health and well being

Health and Safety (%):
1. The number and rate of fatalities as a result of work-related
injury; high-consequence work-related injuries (excluding
fatalities); recordable work-related injuries, main types of workrelated injury; and the number of hours worked.
2. An explanation of how the organization facilitates workers’
access to non-occupational medical and healthcare services
and the scope of access provided for employees and workers.

1. This metric is not material for the banking industry.
2. Refer to the Human Capital Management section of this
Annual Report.
IBC

Skills for the future

Training provided (#, $):
1. Average hours of training per person that the organization’s
employees have undertaken during the reporting period, by
gender and employee category (total number of trainings
provided to employees divided by the number of employees).
2. Average training and development expenditure per full time
employee.

Refer to the Human Capital Management section of this Annual
Report for training hours and expenditure data.

Number of unfilled “Skilled” positions (#, %):
1. Number of Unfilled “Skilled” positions (#)
2. Percentage of unfilled “Skilled” positions for which the
company will hire unskilled candidates and train them. (%)

Bank of America is committed to creating opportunities for our current
and prospective employees to grow and develop, including reskilling
for specialized jobs. We’re working toward an additional goal to hire
more than 10,000 teammates from LMI neighborhoods through our
Pathways career programs by 2025, bringing our total to 20,000 LMI
hires. Pathways works with expanded partnerships with community
colleges and local organizations such as Year Up, Road to Hire,
UnidosUS and the Urban Alliance. For more information on how we
attract and develop talent, refer to the Human Capital Management
section of this Annual Report.
IBC

IBC

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 67

SASB Activity Metrics/Other

miscellaneous & appendix

Our responses to the SASB Activity Metrics referenced below can be found within our 2022 Financial Review. We have provided the specific page numbers and location (where
appropriate) where each response to the Activity Metric can be located.
Reference

Response

FN-CB-000.B,
FN-IB-000.A,
FN-MF-000.A

Refer to Note 5 on pages 161-171 for disclosure of our Loans and Leases.

FN-IB-000.C,
FN-AC-000.A
FN-AC-000.B

Refer to the Global Markets tables on pages 91-92 and additional information on page 88 for this data.

FN-CB-000.A
FN-CB-000.B

For more on consumer and small business deposits, refer to the Business Segment Operations section of the 2022 Financial Review,
pages 84-93. Our Consumer Banking segment deposit information includes Small Business.

FN-I B -510b.3;
FN-AC-270a.2;
FN-CF-220A.2,
FN-MF-270a.3,
FN-CF-270a.5,
FN-MF-270b.2

Refer to the disclosure of certain legal proceedings in Note 12 of the 2022 Financial Review.

FN-MF-000.A

(1) Number and (2) value of (a) underwriting, (b) advisory, and
(c) securitization transactions

Refer to the Global Investment Banking section on page 90 of the
2022 Financial Review for disclosure of our Investment Banking
activity and Note 6 on pages 171-175 of the 2022 Financial Review
for disclosure regarding our securitizations.

FN-IB-000.C

(1) Number and (2) value of market making transactions in
(a) fixed income, (b) equity, (c) currency, (d) derivatives, and
(e) commodity products

Refer to the Global Markets tables and discussion on pages 91-92
of the 2022 Financial Review for disclosure of the financial results
associated with the Corporation’s market making transactions.

FN-AC-000.A

(1) Total registered and (2) total unregistered assets under
management (AUM)

Refer to the Corporation’s Global Wealth & Investment Management
Key Indicators and Metrics on page 87-88 of the 2022 Financial
Review for our total Assets Under Management. Additionally, refer
to the same table and the Client Balances subsection for further
detail on the Corporation’s client balances under management.

FN-AC-000.B

Total assets under custody and supervision

Refer to the Corporation’s Global Wealth & Investment Management
Key Indicators and Metrics on page 87-88 of the 2022 Financial
Review for our total Assets Under Management. Additionally, refer
to the same table and the Client Balances subsection for further
detail on the Corporation’s client balances under management.

*2022 Environmental Data will be published in Q2 2023.

68 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

This page intentionally left blank.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 69

miscellaneous & appendix

Cautionary Information and
Forward-Looking Statements
This report, including the Stakeholder Capitalism Metrics section,
contains certain statements regarding Responsible Growth and
environmental, social and governance information and opinions,
including metrics, aspirations, targets, goals, commitments,
cumulative values and sustainability strategy (collectively, the
Sustainability Information). The Sustainability Information
included in this report may consider disclosure recommendations
and broader definitions of materiality used by certain voluntary
external frameworks and reporting guidelines that differ from
mandatory regulatory reporting, including the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC). Accordingly, any such Sustainability
Information may be presented from a different perspective and
in more detail than in Bank of America’s regulatory reporting,
and materiality and any use of the term “material” in the context
of the Sustainability Information may be distinct from such
term as defined for SEC reporting purposes. Any inclusion of
Sustainability Information in this report is not an indication that
the subject or information is material to Bank of America for
SEC reporting purposes.
Additionally, Sustainability Information may be based on current
or historic goals, targets, commitments, estimates, assumptions,
standards, methodologies and internal control frameworks and
currently available data, which continue to evolve and develop, and
such statements are not guarantees or promises that any such
metrics, aspirations, targets, goals or commitments will be met.
The Sustainability Information is as of the date referenced, subject
to change without notice and may be regarded as indicative
and for illustrative purposes only. The Sustainability Information
may vary based on applicable laws, rules and regulations and in
different geographic areas. Such Sustainability Information may
also include the use of non-financial metrics and other information
that are subject to significant measurement uncertainties, which
may include the methodology, collection and verification of
data, various estimates and assumptions and/or underlying data
that is obtained from third parties, some of which we cannot
independently verify.

70 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Certain statements contained in this report may constitute
“forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including
statements about our future financial performance and business
and Sustainability Information, which may evolve over time.
We use words such as “anticipates,” “targets,” “expects,” “hopes,”
“estimates,” “intends,” “plans,” “goals,” “believes,” “continue” and
other similar expressions or future or conditional verbs such as
“will,” “may,” “might,” “should,” “would” and “could” to identify
forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements reflect
management’s current expectations, plans or forecasts, are not
guarantees of future results or performance, involve certain
known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions that
are difficult to predict and often beyond our control and are
inherently uncertain. You should not place undue reliance on any
forward-looking statement. Actual outcomes and results may
differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by any of
these forward-looking statements due to a variety of factors,
including global socio-demographic and economic trends,
energy prices, technological innovations and advances, climaterelated conditions and weather events, legislative and regulatory
changes, public policies, engagement with clients, suppliers,
investors, government officials and other stakeholders and other
unforeseen events or conditions, as well as the uncertainties and
risks discussed in Bank of America Corporation’s 2022 Annual
Report on Form 10-K and subsequent SEC filings. Forward-looking
statements speak only as of the date they are made, and Bank
of America Corporation undertakes no obligation to update or
revise any forward-looking statement to reflect the impact of
circumstances or events that arise after the date the forwardlooking statement was made.
Website references and/or links throughout this report are
provided for convenience only, and the content on the referenced
websites is not incorporated by reference into this report.

2022 Financial Review

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 71

Financial Review
Table of Contents
Page

Executive Summary
Recent Developments
Financial Highlights
Balance Sheet Overview
Supplemental Financial Data
Business Segment Operations
Consumer Banking
Global Wealth & Investment Management
Global Banking
Global Markets
All Other
Managing Risk
Strategic Risk Management
Capital Management
Liquidity Risk
Credit Risk Management
Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk Management
Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management
Non-U.S. Portfolio
Loan and Lease Contractual Maturities
Allowance for Credit Losses
Market Risk Management
Trading Risk Management
Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book
Mortgage Banking Risk Management
Compliance and Operational Risk Management
Reputational Risk Management
Climate Risk Management
Complex Accounting Estimates
Non-GAAP Reconciliations

72 Bank of America 2022

73
74
75
77
79
84
85
87
89
91
92
93
96
96
101
106
106
111
117
118
120
122
123
126
127
127
128
128
129
132

Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Bank of America Corporation (the Corporation) and its
management may make certain statements that constitute
“forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements can
be identified by the fact that they do not relate strictly to
historical or current facts. Forward-looking statements often use
words such as “anticipates,” “targets,” “expects,” “hopes,”
“estimates,” “intends,” “plans,” “goals,” “believes,” “continue” and
other similar expressions or future or conditional verbs such as
“will,” “may,” “might,” “should,” “would” and “could.” Forwardlooking statements represent the Corporation’s current
expectations, plans or forecasts of its future results, revenues,
provision for credit losses, expenses, efficiency ratio, capital
measures, strategy and future business and economic conditions
more generally, and other future matters. These statements are
not guarantees of future results or performance and involve
certain known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions
that are difficult to predict and are often beyond the Corporation’s
control. Actual outcomes and results may differ materially from
those expressed in, or implied by, any of these forward-looking
statements.
You should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking
statement and should consider the following uncertainties and
risks, as well as the risks and uncertainties more fully discussed
under Item 1A. Risk Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on Form
10-K: and in any of the Corporation’s subsequent Securities and
Exchange Commission filings: the Corporation’s potential
judgments, orders, settlements, penalties, fines and reputational
damage resulting from pending or future litigation and regulatory
investigations, proceedings and enforcement actions, including as
a result of our participation in and execution of government
programs related to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic, such as the processing of unemployment benefits for
California and certain other states; the possibility that the
Corporation’s future liabilities may be in excess of its recorded
liability and estimated range of possible loss for litigation, and
regulatory and government actions; the possibility that the
Corporation could face increased claims from one or more parties
involved in mortgage securitizations; the Corporation’s ability to
resolve representations and warranties repurchase and related
claims; the risks related to the discontinuation of the London
Interbank Offered Rate and other reference rates, including
increased expenses and litigation and the effectiveness of
hedging strategies; uncertainties about the financial stability and
growth rates of non-U.S. jurisdictions, the risk that those
jurisdictions may face difficulties servicing their sovereign debt,
and related stresses on financial markets, currencies and trade,
and the Corporation’s exposures to such risks, including direct,
indirect and operational; the impact of U.S. and global interest
rates, inflation, currency exchange rates, economic conditions,
trade policies and tensions, including tariffs, and potential
geopolitical instability; the impact of the interest rate, inflationary
and macroeconomic environment on the Corporation’s business,
financial condition and results of operations; the possibility that
future credit losses may be higher than currently expected due to
changes in economic assumptions, customer behavior, adverse
developments with respect to U.S. or global economic conditions
and other uncertainties, including the impact of supply chain
disruptions, inflationary pressures and labor shortages on
economic conditions and our business; potential losses related to
the Corporation's concentration of credit risk; the Corporation’s
ability to achieve its expense targets and expectations regarding
revenue, net interest income, provision for credit losses, net

charge-offs, effective tax rate, loan growth or other projections;
adverse changes to the Corporation’s credit ratings from the
major credit rating agencies; an inability to access capital
markets or maintain deposits or borrowing costs; estimates of the
fair value and other accounting values, subject to impairment
assessments, of certain of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities;
the estimated or actual impact of changes in accounting
standards or assumptions in applying those standards;
uncertainty regarding the content, timing and impact of regulatory
capital and liquidity requirements; the impact of adverse changes
to total loss-absorbing capacity requirements, stress capital buffer
requirements and/or global systemically important bank
surcharges; the potential impact of actions of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the Corporation’s
capital plans; the effect of changes in or interpretations of
income tax laws and regulations; the impact of implementation
and compliance with U.S. and international laws, regulations and
regulatory interpretations, including, but not limited to, recovery
and resolution planning requirements, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation assessments, the Volcker Rule, fiduciary standards,
derivatives regulations and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act and any similar or related rules and
regulations; a failure or disruption in or breach of the
Corporation’s operational or security systems or infrastructure, or
those of third parties, including as a result of cyber-attacks or
campaigns; the risks related to the transition and physical
impacts of climate change; our ability to achieve environmental,
social and governance goals and commitments or the impact of
any changes in the Corporation’s sustainability strategy or
commitments generally; the impact of any future federal
government shutdown and uncertainty regarding the federal
government’s debt limit or changes in fiscal, monetary or
regulatory policy; the emergence or continuation of widespread
health emergencies or pandemics, including the magnitude and
duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on U.S. and/or
global financial market conditions and our business, results of
operations, financial condition and prospects; the impact of
natural disasters, extreme weather events, military conflict
(including the Russia/Ukraine conflict, the possible expansion of
such conflict and potential geopolitical consequences), terrorism
or other geopolitical events; and other matters.
Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are
made, and the Corporation undertakes no obligation to update
any forward-looking statement to reflect the impact of
circumstances or events that arise after the date the forwardlooking statement was made.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements referred to
in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) are incorporated by
reference into the MD&A. Certain prior-year amounts have been
reclassified to conform to current-year presentation. Throughout
the MD&A, the Corporation uses certain acronyms and
abbreviations which are defined in the Glossary.

Executive Summary
Business Overview
The Corporation is a Delaware corporation, a bank holding
company (BHC) and a financial holding company. When used in
this report, “Bank of America,” “the Corporation,” “we,” “us”
and “our” may refer to Bank of America Corporation individually,
Bank of America Corporation and its subsidiaries, or certain of
Bank of America Corporation’s subsidiaries or affiliates. Our

Bank of America 2022 73

principal executive offices are located in Charlotte, North
Carolina. Through our various bank and nonbank subsidiaries
throughout the U.S. and in international markets, we provide a
diversified range of banking and nonbank financial services and
products through four business segments: Consumer Banking,
Global Wealth & Investment Management (GWIM), Global
Banking and Global Markets, with the remaining operations
recorded in All Other. We operate our banking activities primarily
under the Bank of America, National Association (Bank of
America, N.A. or BANA) charter. At December 31, 2022, the
Corporation had $3.1 trillion in assets and a headcount of
approximately 217,000 employees.
As of December 31, 2022, we served clients through
operations across the U.S., its territories and more than 35
countries. Our retail banking footprint covers all major markets
in the U.S., and we serve approximately 67 million consumer
and small business clients with approximately 3,900 retail
financial centers, approximately 16,000 ATMs, and leading
digital banking platforms (www.bankofamerica.com) with
approximately 44 million active users, including approximately
35 million active mobile users. We offer industry-leading support
to approximately three million small business households. Our
GWIM businesses, with client balances of $3.4 trillion, provide
tailored solutions to meet client needs through a full set of
investment management, brokerage, banking, trust and
retirement products. We are a global leader in corporate and
investment banking and trading across a broad range of asset
classes serving corporations, governments, institutions and
individuals around the world.

Recent Developments
Capital Management
On February 1, 2023, the Corporation’s Board of Directors (the
Board) declared a quarterly common stock dividend of $0.22
per share, payable on March 31, 2023 to shareholders of
record as of March 3, 2023.
For more information on our capital resources, see Capital
Management on page 96.

Changes in U.S. Tax Law
On August 16, 2022, the U.S. enacted the Inflation Reduction
Act of 2022, which contained a number of tax-related
provisions. The tax changes included the extension and
expansion of renewable energy tax credit programs, the
establishment of a new 15 percent alternative minimum tax
(AMT) on adjusted financial statement income for large
corporations and a one percent excise tax on stock
repurchases. For more information, see Financial Highlights –
Income Tax Expense on page 76.

Russia/Ukraine Conflict
Due to the Russia/Ukraine conflict, there has been significant
volatility in financial and commodities markets, and multiple
jurisdictions have implemented various economic sanctions. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, our direct net country exposure
to Russia was $443 million and $733 million, primarily
consisting of outstanding loans and leases totaling $391 million
and $686 million, and our net country exposure to Ukraine was
not significant. While the Corporation’s direct exposure to
Russia is limited, the potential duration, course and impact of
the Russia/Ukraine conflict remain uncertain and could
adversely affect macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions,
which could negatively impact the Corporation's businesses,
results of operations and financial position. For more

74 Bank of America 2022

information on the risks related to the Russia/Ukraine conflict,
see the Market, Credit and Geopolitical sections in Item 1A.
Risk Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

LIBOR and Other Benchmark Rates
After December 31, 2021, ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA)
ceased publishing British Pound Sterling (GBP), Euro, Swiss
Franc, and Japanese Yen (JPY) London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR) settings and one-week and two-month U.S. dollar (USD)
LIBOR settings, subject to the continued publication of certain
non-representative LIBOR settings based on a modified
calculation (i.e., on a “synthetic” basis). The remaining USD
LIBOR settings (i.e., overnight, one month, three month, six
month and 12 month) will cease or become non-representative
immediately after June 30, 2023, although the Financial
Conduct Authority (FCA) has issued a consultation seeking views
on whether to compel publication of the one-month, three-month
and six-month USD LIBOR settings on a “synthetic” basis for a
short time after June 30, 2023 (i.e., through September 30,
2024). Separately, the Federal Reserve, the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC) issued supervisory guidance encouraging
banks to cease entering into new contracts that use USD LIBOR
as a reference rate by December 31, 2021, subject to certain
regulatory-approved exceptions (USD LIBOR Guidance).
As a result, a major transition has been and continues to be
in progress in the global financial markets with respect to the
replacement of Interbank Offered Rates (IBORs). This has been
and continues to be a complex process impacting a variety of
our businesses and operations. IBORs have historically been
used in many of the Corporation’s products and contracts,
including derivatives, consumer and commercial loans,
mortgages, floating-rate notes and other adjustable-rate
products and financial instruments. In response, the
Corporation established an enterprise-wide IBOR transition
program, with active involvement of senior management and
regular reports to the Management Risk Committee (MRC) and
Enterprise Risk Committee (ERC). The program continues to
drive the Corporation's industry and regulatory engagement,
client and financial contract changes, internal and external
communications, technology and operations modifications,
including updates to its operational models, systems and
processes, introduction of new products, migration of existing
clients, and program strategy and governance.
As of December 31, 2021, the Corporation transitioned or
otherwise addressed IBOR-based products and contracts
referencing the rates that ceased or became non-representative
after December 31, 2021, including LIBOR-linked commercial
loans, LIBOR-based adjustable-rate consumer mortgages,
LIBOR-linked derivatives and interdealer trading of certain USD
LIBOR and other interest rate swaps, and related hedging
arrangements. Additionally, in accordance with the USD LIBOR
Guidance, the Corporation has ceased entering into new
contracts that use USD LIBOR as a reference rate, subject to
limited exceptions, including those consistent with supervisory
guidance.
The Corporation launched capabilities and services to
support the issuance of and trading in products indexed to
various alternative reference rates (ARRs) and developed
employee training programs as well as other internal and
external sources of information on the various challenges and
opportunities that the replacement of IBORs has presented and
continues to present. The Corporation continues to monitor a
variety of market scenarios as part of its transition efforts,
including risks associated with insufficient preparation by

individual market participants or the overall market ecosystem,
ability of market participants to meet regulatory and industrywide recommended milestones, and access and demand by
clients and market participants to liquidity in certain products,
including LIBOR products.
With respect to the transition of LIBOR products referencing
USD LIBOR settings ceasing or becoming non-representative as
of June 30, 2023, a significant majority of the Corporation’s
notional contractual exposure to such LIBOR settings, of which
the significant majority is derivatives contracts, have been
remediated (i.e., updated to include fallback provisions to ARRs
based on market-driven protocols, regulatory guidance and
industry-recommended fallback provisions and related
mechanisms), and the Corporation is continuing to remediate
the remaining USD LIBOR exposure. For example, during the
first half of 2023, certain central counterparties (CCPs) expect
to complete processes to convert outstanding USD LIBORcleared derivatives to ARR positions. The remaining exposure, a
majority of which is made up of derivatives and commercial
loans and which represents a small minority of outstanding USD
LIBOR notional contractual exposure of the Corporation, requires
active dialogue with clients to modify the contracts. For any
residual exposures after June 2023 that continue to have no
fallback provisions, the Corporation continues to assess and
plans to leverage relevant contractual and statutory solutions,
including the Adjustable Interest Rate (LIBOR) Act in the U.S. (as
implemented by the Federal Reserve) and “synthetic” USD
LIBOR (if the FCA compels such publication), to transition such
exposure.
While there remain risks to the Corporation associated with
the transition from IBORs (as discussed under Item 1A. Risk
Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K), such risks
have been monitored and, where applicable, managed through
the Corporation’s efforts and dedicated operational resources to
date. In the Corporation’s view, the potential likelihood and/or
impact of transition-related risks has lessened over time, and
the Corporation anticipates it has devoted appropriate
resources to remaining transition efforts and will be able to
continue to appropriately monitor and manage such risks as the
transition process continues. The Corporation expects
transition-related risks to further diminish as certain market
developments occur prior to June 30, 2023.
The Corporation has implemented regulatory, tax and
accounting changes and continues to monitor current and
potential impacts of the transition, including Internal Revenue
Service tax regulations and guidance and Financial Accounting
Standards Board guidance. In addition, the Corporation has
engaged impacted clients in connection with the transition by
providing education on ARRs and the timing of transition events.
The Corporation is also working actively with global regulators,
industry working groups and trade associations.
For more information on the expected replacement of LIBOR
and other benchmark rates, see Item 1A. Risk Factors of our
2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

Financial Highlights
Table 1 Summary Income Statement and Selected
Financial Data
2021

2022

(Dollars in millions, except per share information)

Income statement
Net interest income

$

Noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses

52,462

$

46,179

94,950

89,113
(4,594)

2,543

Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income
Preferred stock dividends and other
Net income applicable to common
shareholders

$

42,934

42,488

61,438

59,731

30,969

33,976

3,441

1,998

27,528

31,978

1,513

1,421

26,015

$

3.21

$

30,557

Per common share information
Earnings
Diluted earnings

$

Dividends paid

3.60

3.19

3.57

0.86

0.78

0.88 %

1.05 %

Performance ratios
Return on average assets

(1)

Return on average common shareholders’
equity (1)
Return on average tangible common
shareholders’ equity (2)
Efficiency ratio (1)

10.75

12.23

15.15

17.02

64.71

67.03

Balance sheet at year end
Total loans and leases
Total assets

(1)
(2)

$ 1,045,747
3,051,375

$

979,124
3,169,495

Total deposits

1,930,341

2,064,446

Total liabilities

2,778,178

2,899,429

Total common shareholders’ equity

244,800

245,358

Total shareholders’ equity

273,197

270,066

For definitions, see Key Metrics on page 214.
Return on average tangible common shareholders’ equity is a non-GAAP financial measure.
For more information and a corresponding reconciliation to the most closely related financial
measures defined by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAP), see Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 132.

Net income was $27.5 billion, or $3.19 per diluted share in
2022 compared to $32.0 billion, or $3.57 per diluted share in
2021. The decrease in net income was primarily due to an
increase in provision for credit losses, lower noninterest income
and higher noninterest expense, partially offset by higher net
interest income.
For discussion and analysis of our consolidated and
business segment results of operations for 2021 compared to
2020, see Financial Highlights and Business Segment
Operations sections in the MD&A of the Corporation’s 2021
Annual Report on Form 10-K.

Net Interest Income
Net interest income increased $9.5 billion to $52.5 billion in
2022 compared to 2021. Net interest yield on a fully taxableequivalent (FTE) basis increased 30 basis points (bps) to 1.96
percent for 2022. The increase was primarily driven by benefits
from higher interest rates, including lower premium amortization
expense, and loan growth, partially offset by a lower amount of
accelerated net capitalized loan fees due to Paycheck Protection
Program (PPP) loan forgiveness, which primarily occurred in
2021. For more information on net interest yield and the FTE
basis, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 79, and for

Bank of America 2022 75

more information on interest rate risk management, see Interest
Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 126.

Noninterest Income
Table 2 Noninterest Income
Fees and commissions:
Card income
Service charges
Investment and brokerage services
Investment banking fees
Total fees and commissions
Market making and similar activities
Other income
Total noninterest income

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

6,083 $
6,405
15,901
4,823
33,212
12,075
(2,799)
42,488 $

6,218
7,504
16,690
8,887
39,299
8,691
(1,811)
46,179

Noninterest income decreased $3.7 billion to $42.5 billion for
2022 compared to 2021. The following highlights the significant
changes.
●

●

●

●

●

Service charges decreased $1.1 billion primarily driven by
the impact of non-sufficient funds and overdraft policy
changes as well as lower treasury service charges.
Investment and brokerage services decreased $789 million
primarily driven by lower market valuations and declines in
assets under management (AUM) pricing, partially offset by
positive AUM flows.
Investment banking fees decreased $4.1 billion primarily
driven by a decline in demand resulting in lower equity and
debt issuance fees and lower advisory fees.
Market making and similar activities increased $3.4 billion
primarily driven by improved performance across macro
products in fixed income, currencies and commodities (FICC)
and by the impact of higher interest rates on client financing
activities in Equities.
Other income decreased $988 million primarily due to
certain valuation adjustments.

Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses increased $7.1 billion to $2.5
billion for 2022 compared to 2021. The provision for credit
losses for 2022 was primarily driven by loan growth and a
dampened macroeconomic outlook, partially offset by a reserve
release for reduced COVID-19 pandemic (the pandemic)
uncertainties. For the same period in the prior year, the benefit
in the provision for credit losses was due to an improved
macroeconomic outlook. For more information on the provision
for credit losses, see Allowance for Credit Losses on page 120.

Noninterest Expense
Table 3

Noninterest Expense

(Dollars in millions)

Compensation and benefits
Occupancy and equipment
Information processing and communications
Product delivery and transaction related
Marketing
Professional fees
Other general operating
Total noninterest expense

76 Bank of America 2022

$

$

2022
36,447
7,071
6,279
3,653
1,825
2,142
4,021
61,438

$

$

2021
36,140
7,138
5,769
3,881
1,939
1,775
3,089
59,731

Noninterest expense increased $1.7 billion to $61.4 billion in
2022 compared to 2021. The increase was primarily due to
higher investments in people and technology, expense
associated with the settlement of the legacy monoline insurance
litigation and expense related to certain regulatory matters,
partially offset by lower net COVID-19 related costs.

Income Tax Expense
Table 4 Income Tax Expense
(Dollars in millions)

Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Effective tax rate

$

2022
$
30,969
3,441
11.1 %

2021
33,976
1,998
5.9 %

Income tax expense was $3.4 billion for 2022 compared to
$2.0 billion in 2021 resulting in an effective tax rate of 11.1
percent compared to 5.9 percent.
The effective tax rates for 2022 and 2021 were primarily
driven by our recurring preference benefits. Also included in the
effective tax rate for 2021 was the impact of the 2021 U.K. tax
law change further discussed in this section. For more
information on our recurring tax preference benefits, see Note
19 – Income Taxes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Absent environmental, social and governance (ESG) tax credits
and discrete tax benefits, the effective tax rates would have
been approximately 25 percent.
On August 16, 2022, the U.S. enacted the Inflation
Reduction Act of 2022, which contained a number of tax-related
provisions, including the extension and expansion of renewable
energy tax credit programs. In particular, partnerships are no
longer solely limited to an Investment Tax Credit, but can now
also elect a Production Tax Credit for solar energy production
facilities placed in service after December 31, 2021.
Other notable tax law changes include the establishment of
a new 15 percent AMT on adjusted financial statement income
for large corporations and a one percent excise tax on net stock
repurchases, both of which were effective for tax years
beginning on or after January 1, 2023. The tax law changes for
the new AMT permit business credits, including those from ESG
investments in renewable energy and affordable housing, to
offset potential AMT liability. The Corporation has assessed the
potential impacts of these two U.S. tax law changes and does
not expect the changes to have a significant effect on its future
effective tax rate.
On June 10, 2021, the U.K. enacted the 2021 Finance Act,
which increased the U.K. corporation income tax rate to 25
percent from 19 percent. This change is effective April 1, 2023
and unfavorably affects income tax expense on future U.K.
earnings. As a result, during the three months ended June 30,
2021, the Corporation recorded a positive income tax
adjustment of approximately $2.0 billion with a corresponding
write-up of U.K. net deferred tax assets, which reflected a
reversal of previously recorded write-downs of net deferred tax
assets for prior changes in the U.K. corporation income tax rate.

Balance Sheet Overview
Table 5 Selected Balance Sheet Data
December 31
2021
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell
Trading account assets
Debt securities
Loans and leases
Allowance for loan and lease losses
All other assets
Total assets
Liabilities
Deposits
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase
Trading account liabilities
Short-term borrowings
Long-term debt
All other liabilities
Total liabilities
Shareholders’ equity
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity

Assets

$

$
$

$

230,203
267,574
296,108
862,819
1,045,747
(12,682)
361,606
3,051,375
1,930,341
195,635
80,399
26,932
275,982
268,889
2,778,178
273,197
3,051,375

$

$
$

$

$ Change

% Change

348,221 $
250,720
247,080
982,627
979,124
(12,387)
374,110
3,169,495 $

(118,018)
16,854
49,028
(119,808)
66,623
(295)
(12,504)
(118,120)

(34)%
7
20
(12)
7
2
(3)
(4)

2,064,446
192,329
100,690
23,753
280,117
238,094
2,899,429
270,066
3,169,495

(134,105)
3,306
(20,291)
3,179
(4,135)
30,795
(121,251)
3,131
(118,120)

(6)
2
(20)
13
(1)
13
(4)
1
(4)

$

$

purchased under agreements to resell increased $16.9 billion
primarily due to client activity within Global Markets.

At December 31, 2022, total assets were approximately $3.1
trillion, down $118.1 billion from December 31, 2021. The
decrease in assets was primarily due to lower debt securities
and cash and cash equivalents, partially offset by an increase in
loans and leases, trading account assets and federal funds sold
and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to
resell.

Trading account assets consist primarily of long positions in
equity and fixed-income securities including U.S. government
and agency securities, corporate securities and non-U.S.
sovereign debt. Trading account assets increased $49.0 billion
primarily due to client activity within Global Markets.

Cash and Cash Equivalents

Debt Securities

Cash and cash equivalents decreased $118.0 billion primarily
driven by lower deposits and continued loan growth.

Federal Funds Sold and Securities Borrowed or Purchased
Under Agreements to Resell
Federal funds transactions involve lending reserve balances on
a short-term basis. Securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell are collateralized lending transactions
utilized to accommodate customer transactions, earn interest
rate spreads and obtain securities for settlement and for
collateral. Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or

Trading Account Assets

Debt securities primarily include U.S. Treasury and agency
securities, mortgage-backed securities (MBS), principally agency
MBS, non-U.S. bonds, corporate bonds and municipal debt. We
use the debt securities portfolio primarily to manage interest
rate and liquidity risk and to leverage market conditions that
create economically attractive returns on these investments.
Debt securities decreased $119.8 billion primarily driven by
lower deposits and continued loan growth. For more information
on debt securities, see Note 4 – Securities to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.

Bank of America 2022 77

Loans and Leases

Short-term Borrowings

Loans and leases increased $66.6 billion primarily driven by
growth in commercial loans, higher credit card spending and
higher residential mortgages due to lower paydowns and
continued originations. For more information on the loan
portfolio, see Credit Risk Management on page 106.

Short-term borrowings provide an additional funding source and
primarily consist of Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) short-term
borrowings, notes payable and various other borrowings that
generally have maturities of one year or less. Short-term
borrowings increased $3.2 billion primarily due to an increase in
FHLB advances and commercial paper to manage liquidity
needs. For more information on short-term borrowings, see Note
10 – Securities Financing Agreements, Short-term Borrowings,
Collateral and Restricted Cash to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
The allowance for loan and lease losses increased $295 million
primarily driven by loan growth and a dampened macroeconomic
outlook, partially offset by a reserve release for reduced
pandemic uncertainties. For more information, see Allowance for
Credit Losses on page 120.

All Other Assets
All other assets decreased $12.5 billion primarily driven by a
decline in margin loans and loans held-for-sale (LHFS).

Liabilities
At December 31, 2022, total liabilities were approximately $2.8
trillion, down $121.3 billion from December 31, 2021, primarily
due to lower deposits.

Deposits
Deposits decreased $134.1 billion primarily due to an increase
in customer spending and a shift to higher yielding accounts.

Federal Funds Purchased and Securities Loaned or Sold
Under Agreements to Repurchase
Federal funds transactions involve borrowing reserve balances
on a short-term basis. Securities loaned or sold under
agreements to repurchase are collateralized borrowing
transactions utilized to accommodate customer transactions,
earn interest rate spreads and finance assets on the balance
sheet. Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold
under agreements to repurchase increased $3.3 billion primarily
driven by an increase in repurchase agreements to support
liquidity.

Trading Account Liabilities
Trading account liabilities consist primarily of short positions in
equity and fixed-income securities including U.S. Treasury and
agency securities, non-U.S. sovereign debt and corporate
securities. Trading account liabilities decreased $20.3 billion
primarily due to lower levels of short positions within Global
Markets.

78 Bank of America 2022

Long-term Debt
Long-term debt decreased $4.1 billion primarily due to
maturities, redemptions and valuation adjustments, partially
offset by issuances. For more information on long-term debt,
see Note 11 – Long-term Debt to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

All Other Liabilities
All other liabilities increased $30.8 billion primarily driven by
Global Markets client activity.

Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity increased $3.1 billion primarily due to net
income and the issuance of preferred stock, partially offset by
market value decreases on derivatives and debt securities, and
returns of capital to shareholders through common and
preferred stock dividends and common stock repurchases.

Cash Flows Overview
The Corporation’s operating assets and liabilities support our
global markets and lending activities. We believe that cash
flows from operations, available cash balances and our ability to
generate cash through short- and long-term debt are sufficient to
fund our operating liquidity needs. Our investing activities
primarily include the debt securities portfolio and loans and
leases. Our financing activities reflect cash flows primarily
related to customer deposits, securities financing agreements,
long-term debt and common and preferred stock. For more
information on liquidity, see Liquidity Risk on page 101.

Supplemental Financial Data
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In this Form 10-K, we present certain non-GAAP financial
measures. Non-GAAP financial measures exclude certain items
or otherwise include components that differ from the most
directly comparable measures calculated in accordance with
GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures are provided as additional
useful information to assess our financial condition, results of
operations (including period-to-period operating performance) or
compliance with prospective regulatory requirements. These
non-GAAP financial measures are not intended as a substitute
for GAAP financial measures and may not be defined or
calculated the same way as non-GAAP financial measures used
by other companies.
We view net interest income and related ratios and analyses
on an FTE basis, which when presented on a consolidated basis
are non-GAAP financial measures. To derive the FTE basis, net
interest income is adjusted to reflect tax-exempt income on an
equivalent before-tax basis with a corresponding increase in
income tax expense. For purposes of this calculation, we use
the federal statutory tax rate of 21 percent and a representative
state tax rate. Net interest yield, which measures the basis
points we earn over the cost of funds, utilizes net interest
income on an FTE basis. We believe that presentation of these
items on an FTE basis allows for comparison of amounts from
both taxable and tax-exempt sources and is consistent with
industry practices.
We may present certain key performance indicators and
ratios excluding certain items (e.g., debit valuation adjustment
(DVA) gains (losses)), which result in non-GAAP financial
measures. We believe that the presentation of measures that
exclude these items is useful because such measures provide
additional information to assess the underlying operational
performance and trends of our businesses and to allow better
comparison of period-to-period operating performance.
We also evaluate our business based on certain ratios that
utilize tangible equity, a non-GAAP financial measure. Tangible
equity
represents
shareholders’
equity
or
common
shareholders’ equity reduced by goodwill and intangible assets
(excluding mortgage servicing rights (MSRs)), net of related
deferred tax liabilities (“adjusted” shareholders’ equity or
common shareholders’ equity). These measures are used to
evaluate our use of equity. In addition, profitability, relationship
and investment models use both return on average tangible

common shareholders’ equity and return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity as key measures to support our overall
growth objectives. These ratios are:
●
Return on average tangible common shareholders’ equity
measures our net income applicable to common
shareholders as a percentage of adjusted average common
shareholders’ equity. The tangible common equity ratio
represents adjusted ending common shareholders’ equity
divided by total tangible assets.
●
Return on average tangible shareholders’ equity measures
our net income as a percentage of adjusted average total
shareholders’ equity. The tangible equity ratio represents
adjusted ending shareholders’ equity divided by total
tangible assets.
●
Tangible book value per common share represents adjusted
ending common shareholders’ equity divided by ending
common shares outstanding.
We believe ratios utilizing tangible equity provide additional
useful information because they present measures of those
assets that can generate income. Tangible book value per
common share provides additional useful information about the
level of tangible assets in relation to outstanding shares of
common stock.
The aforementioned supplemental data and performance
measures are presented in Tables 6 and 7.
For more information on the reconciliation of these non-GAAP
financial measures to the corresponding GAAP financial
measures, see Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 132.

Key Performance Indicators
We present certain key financial and nonfinancial performance
indicators (key performance indicators) that management uses
when assessing our consolidated and/or segment results. We
believe they are useful to investors because they provide
additional information about our underlying operational
performance and trends. These key performance indicators
(KPIs) may not be defined or calculated in the same way as
similar KPIs used by other companies. For information on how
these metrics are defined, see Key Metrics on page 214.
Our consolidated key performance indicators, which include
various equity and credit metrics, are presented in Table 1 on
page 75, Table 6 on page 80 and Table 7 on page 81.
For information on key segment performance metrics, see
Business Segment Operations on page 84.

Bank of America 2022 79

Table 6 Selected Annual Financial Data

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

2021

2022

(In millions, except per share information)

Income statement
Net interest income
Noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income
Net income applicable to common shareholders
Average common shares issued and outstanding
Average diluted common shares issued and outstanding
Performance ratios
Return on average assets (1)
Return on average common shareholders’ equity (1)
Return on average tangible common shareholders’ equity (1, 2)
Return on average shareholders’ equity (1)
Return on average tangible shareholders’ equity (1, 2)
Total ending equity to total ending assets
Common equity ratio (1)
Total average equity to total average assets
Dividend payout (1)
Per common share data
Earnings
Diluted earnings
Dividends paid
Book value (1)
Tangible book value (2)
Market capitalization
Average balance sheet
Total loans and leases
Total assets
Total deposits
Long-term debt
Common shareholders’ equity
Total shareholders’ equity
Asset quality
Allowance for credit losses (3)
Nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties (4)
Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total loans and leases outstanding (4)
Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total nonperforming loans and leases (4)
Net charge-offs
Net charge-offs as a percentage of average loans and leases outstanding (4)
Capital ratios at year end (5)
Common equity tier 1 capital
Tier 1 capital
Total capital
Tier 1 leverage
Supplementary leverage ratio
Tangible equity (2)
Tangible common equity (2)

$

52,462
42,488
94,950
2,543
61,438
30,969
3,441
27,528
26,015
8,113.7
8,167.5

$

$

3.21
3.19
0.86
30.61
21.83
264,853

$

$

$ 1,016,782
3,135,894
1,986,158
246,479
241,981
270,299

$

$

$

$

14,222
3,978
1.22 %
333
2,172
0.21 %
11.2 %
13.0
14.9
7.0
5.9
6.8
5.9

$

1.05 %
12.23
17.02
11.68
15.71
8.52
7.74
9.02
21.51

0.88 %
10.75
15.15
10.18
13.76
8.95
8.02
8.62
26.77
$

42,934
46,179
89,113
(4,594)
59,731
33,976
1,998
31,978
30,557
8,493.3
8,558.4

2020

$

3.60
3.57
0.78
30.37
21.68
359,383
920,401
3,034,623
1,914,286
237,703
249,787
273,757
13,843
4,697
1.28 %
271
2,243
0.25 %
10.6 %
12.1
14.1
6.4
5.5
6.4
5.7

43,360
42,168
85,528
11,320
55,213
18,995
1,101
17,894
16,473
8,753.2
8,796.9
0.67 %
6.76
9.48
6.69
9.07
9.68
8.81
9.96
38.18

$

$
$

$

$

1.88
1.87
0.72
28.72
20.60
262,206
982,467
2,683,122
1,632,998
220,440
243,685
267,309
20,680
5,116
2.04 %
380
4,121
0.42 %
11.9 %
13.5
16.1
7.4
7.2
7.4
6.5

For definition, see Key Metrics on page 214.
Tangible equity ratios and tangible book value per share of common stock are non-GAAP financial measures. For more information on these ratios and corresponding reconciliations to GAAP
financial measures, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 79 and Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 132.
Includes the allowance for loan and leases losses and the reserve for unfunded lending commitments.
Balances and ratios do not include loans accounted for under the fair value option. For additional exclusions from nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties, see Consumer Portfolio
Credit Risk Management – Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 110 and corresponding Table 27 and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management
– Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 115 and corresponding Table 34.
For more information, including which approach is used to assess capital adequacy, see Capital Management on page 96.

80 Bank of America 2022

Table 7 Selected Quarterly Financial Data
2022 Quarters
Third
Second

Fourth

(In millions, except per share information)

First

2021 Quarters
Third
Second

Fourth

First

Income statement
Net interest income

$

Noninterest income

14,681

$

13,765

$

12,444

$

11,572

$

11,410

$

11,094

$

10,233

$

10,197

9,851

10,737

10,244

11,656

10,650

11,672

11,233

12,624

24,532

24,502

22,688

23,228

22,060

22,766

21,466

22,821

1,092

898

523

30

(489)

(624)

(1,621)

(1,860)

15,543

15,303

15,273

15,319

14,731

14,440

15,045

15,515

7,897

8,301

6,892

7,879

7,818

8,950

8,042

9,166

765

1,219

645

812

805

1,259

(1,182)

1,116

Net income

7,132

7,082

6,247

7,067

7,013

7,691

9,224

8,050

Net income applicable to common shareholders

6,904

6,579

5,932

6,600

6,773

7,260

8,964

7,560

Average common shares issued and outstanding

8,088.3

8,107.7

8,121.6

8,136.8

8,226.5

8,430.7

8,620.8

8,700.1

Average diluted common shares issued and outstanding

8,155.7

8,160.8

8,163.1

8,202.1

8,304.7

8,492.8

8,735.5

8,755.6

Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense

Performance ratios
Return on average assets (1)

0.92 %

0.90 %

0.79 %

0.89 %

0.88 %

0.99 %

1.23 %

Four-quarter trailing return on average assets (2)

0.88

0.87

0.89

0.99

1.05

1.04

0.97

0.79

Return on average common shareholders’ equity (1)

11.24

10.79

9.93

11.02

10.90

11.43

14.33

12.28

Return on average tangible common shareholders’ equity (3)

15.79

15.21

14.05

15.51

15.25

15.85

19.90

17.08

Return on average shareholders’ equity (1)

10.38

10.37

9.34

10.64

10.27

11.08

13.47

11.91

Return on average tangible shareholders’ equity (3)

13.98

13.99

12.66

14.40

13.87

14.87

18.11

16.01

Total ending equity to total ending assets

8.95

8.77

8.65

8.23

8.52

8.83

9.15

9.23

Common equity ratio (1)

8.02

7.82

7.71

7.40

7.74

8.07

8.37

8.41

Total average equity to total average assets
Dividend payout (1)

1.13 %

8.87

8.73

8.49

8.40

8.56

8.95

9.11

9.52

25.71

27.06

28.68

25.86

25.33

24.10

17.25

20.68

Per common share data
Earnings

$

0.85

$

0.81

$

0.73

$

0.81

$

0.82

$

0.86

$

1.04

$

0.87

Diluted earnings

0.85

0.81

0.73

0.80

0.82

0.85

1.03

Dividends paid

0.22

0.22

0.21

0.21

0.21

0.21

0.18

0.18

Book value (1)

30.61

29.96

29.87

29.70

30.37

30.22

29.89

29.07

Tangible book value (3)
Market capitalization

0.86

21.83

21.21

21.13

20.99

21.68

21.69

21.61

20.90

$ 264,853

$ 242,338

$ 250,136

$ 332,320

$ 359,383

$ 349,841

$ 349,925

$ 332,337
$ 907,723

Average balance sheet
Total loans and leases

$1,039,247

$1,034,334

$1,014,886

$ 977,793

$ 945,062

$ 920,509

$ 907,900

Total assets

3,074,289

3,105,546

3,157,885

3,207,702

3,164,118

3,076,452

3,015,113

2,879,221

Total deposits

1,925,544

1,962,775

2,012,079

2,045,811

2,017,223

1,942,705

1,888,834

1,805,747

Long-term debt

243,871

250,204

245,781

246,042

248,525

248,988

232,034

220,836

Common shareholders’ equity

243,647

241,882

239,523

242,865

246,519

252,043

250,948

249,648

Total shareholders’ equity

272,629

271,017

268,197

269,309

270,883

275,484

274,632

274,047

Asset quality
Allowance for credit losses (4)

$

Nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties (5)

689

$

520

$

571

$

392

$

362

$

463

$

1.80 %

287
$

595
0.27 %

17,997
5,299

1.55 %

279
$

15,782
5,031

1.43 %

271
$

14,693
4,831

1.28 %

262
$

13,843
4,697

1.23 %

288
$

13,483
4,778

1.17 %

309
$

13,434
4,326

1.20 %

333
$

13,817
4,156

1.22 %

Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total
nonperforming loans and leases (5)
Annualized net charge-offs as a percentage of average loans
and leases outstanding (5)

$

3,978

Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total
loans and leases outstanding (5)

Net charge-offs

14,222

313
$

823

0.26 %

0.20 %

0.23 %

0.16 %

0.15 %

0.20 %

0.37 %

Common equity tier 1 capital

11.2 %

11.0 %

10.5 %

10.4 %

10.6 %

11.1 %

11.5 %

11.8 %

Tier 1 capital

13.0

12.8

12.3

12.0

12.1

12.6

13.0

13.3

Total capital

Capital ratios at period end (6)

14.9

14.7

14.2

14.0

14.1

14.7

15.1

15.6

Tier 1 leverage

7.0

6.8

6.5

6.3

6.4

6.6

6.9

7.2

Supplementary leverage ratio

5.9

5.8

5.5

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.9

7.0

Tangible equity (3)

6.8

6.6

6.5

6.2

6.4

6.7

7.0

7.0

Tangible common equity (3)

5.9

5.7

5.6

5.3

5.7

5.9

6.2

6.2

Total loss-absorbing capacity and long-term debt metrics
Total loss-absorbing capacity to risk-weighted assets

29.0 %

28.9 %

27.8 %

27.2 %

26.9 %

27.7 %

27.7 %

26.8 %

Total loss-absorbing capacity to supplementary leverage
exposure

13.2

13.0

12.6

12.2

12.1

12.4

12.5

14.1

Eligible long-term debt to risk-weighted assets

15.2

15.2

14.7

14.4

14.1

14.4

14.1

13.0

6.9

6.8

6.6

6.5

6.3

6.4

6.3

6.8

Eligible long-term debt to supplementary leverage exposure
(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

For definitions, see Key Metrics on page 214.
Calculated as total net income for four consecutive quarters divided by annualized average assets for four consecutive quarters.
Tangible equity ratios and tangible book value per share of common stock are non-GAAP financial measures. For more information on these ratios and corresponding reconciliations to GAAP
financial measures, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 79 and Non-GAAP Reconciliations on page 132.
Includes the allowance for loan and lease losses and the reserve for unfunded lending commitments.
Balances and ratios do not include loans accounted for under the fair value option. For additional exclusions from nonperforming loans, leases and foreclosed properties, see Consumer Portfolio
Credit Risk Management – Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 111 and corresponding Table 27 and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management
– Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity on page 115 and corresponding Table 34.
For more information, including which approach is used to assess capital adequacy, see Capital Management on page 96.

Bank of America 2022 81

Table 8 Average Balances and Interest Rates - FTE Basis
Average
Balance

Interest
Income/
Expense (1)

(Dollars in millions)

Average
Balance

Yield/
Rate

Interest
Income/
Expense (1)

Yield/
Rate

Average
Balance

Interest
Income/
Expense (1)

2021

2022

Yield/
Rate

2020

Earning assets
Interest-bearing deposits with the Federal Reserve, nonU.S. central banks and other banks

$

Time deposits placed and other short-term investments

195,564

$

2,591

1.32 %

$

255,595

9,209

132

1.44

7,603

Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased
under agreements to resell (2)

292,799

4,560

1.56

Trading account assets

158,102

5,586

3.53

Debt securities

922,730

17,207

$

172

0.07 %

15

0.19

267,257

(90)

(0.03)

147,891

3,823

2.58

1.86

905,169

12,433

$

253,227

$

8,840

359

0.14 %

29

0.33

309,945

903

0.29

148,076

4,185

2.83

1.38

532,266

9,868

1.87
3.10

Loans and leases (3)
Residential mortgage

227,604

6,375

2.80

216,983

5,995

2.76

236,719

7,338

Home equity

27,364

959

3.50

31,014

1,066

3.44

38,251

1,290

3.37

Credit card

83,539

8,408

10.06

75,385

7,772

10.31

85,017

8,759

10.30

Direct/Indirect and other consumer

107,050

3,317

3.10

96,472

2,276

2.36

89,974

2,545

2.83

445,557

19,059

4.28

419,854

17,109

4.08

449,961

19,932

4.43

U.S. commercial

366,748

12,251

3.34

324,795

8,606

2.65

344,095

9,712

2.82

Non-U.S. commercial

125,222

3,702

2.96

99,584

1,752

1.76

106,487

2,208

2.07

Commercial real estate (4)

65,421

2,595

3.97

60,303

1,496

2.48

63,428

1,790

2.82

Commercial lease financing

13,834

473

3.42

15,865

462

2.91

18,496

559

3.02

571,225

19,021

3.33

500,547

12,316

2.46

532,506

14,269

2.68

1,016,782

38,080

3.75

920,401

29,425

3.20

982,467

34,201

3.48

105,674

4,847

4.59

112,512

2,321

2.06

83,078

2,539

3.06

2,700,860

73,003

2.70

2,616,428

48,099

1.84

2,317,899

52,084

2.25

Total consumer

Total commercial
Total loans and leases
Other earning assets
Total earning assets
Cash and due from banks
Other assets, less allowance for loan and lease losses
Total assets

31,214

28,029

31,885

407,005

386,981

333,338

$ 3,135,894

$ 3,034,623

$ 2,683,122

Interest-bearing liabilities
U.S. interest-bearing deposits
Demand and money market deposits

314

0.03 %

977

0.12 %

166,490

818

0.49

161,512

170

0.11

170,750

734

0.43

1,153,737

3,963

0.34

1,087,482

484

0.04

1,000,469

1,711

0.17

Non-U.S. interest-bearing deposits

80,951

755

0.93

82,769

53

0.06

77,046

232

0.30

Total interest-bearing deposits

1,234,688

4,718

0.38

1,170,251

537

0.05

1,077,515

1,943

0.18

Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold
under agreements to repurchase

214,369

4,117

1.92

210,848

461

0.22

188,511

1,229

0.65

Short-term borrowings and other interest-bearing
liabilities (2)

137,277

2,861

2.08

106,975

(819)

(0.77)

104,955

(242)

(0.23)

51,208

1,538

3.00

54,107

1,128

2.08

41,386

974

2.35

246,479

6,869

2.79

237,703

3,431

1.44

220,440

4,321

1.96

1,884,021

20,103

1.07

1,779,884

4,738

0.27

1,632,807

8,225

0.50

Time and savings deposits
Total U.S. interest-bearing deposits

Trading account liabilities
Long-term debt
Total interest-bearing liabilities

$

987,247

$

3,145

0.32 %

$

925,970

$

$

829,719

$

Noninterest-bearing sources
Noninterest-bearing deposits

751,470

744,035

555,483

Other liabilities (5)

230,104

236,947

227,523

Shareholders’ equity
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity

270,299

273,757

267,309

$ 3,135,894

$ 3,034,623

$ 2,683,122

Net interest spread

1.63 %

1.57 %

Impact of noninterest-bearing sources

0.33

0.09

Net interest income/yield on earning assets (6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)
(6)

$

52,900

1.96 %

$

43,361

1.66 %

1.75 %
0.15
$

43,859

1.90 %

Includes the impact of interest rate risk management contracts. For more information, see Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 126.
For more information on negative interest, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Nonperforming loans are included in the respective average loan balances. Income on these nonperforming loans is generally recognized on a cost recovery basis.
Includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $61.1 billion, $56.5 billion and $59.8 billion, and non-U.S. commercial real estate loans of $4.3 billion, $3.8 billion and $3.6 billion for 2022, 2021
and 2020, respectively.
Includes $30.7 billion, $30.4 billion and $34.3 billion of structured notes and liabilities for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net interest income includes FTE adjustments of $438 million, $427 million and $499 million for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

82 Bank of America 2022

Table 9 Analysis of Changes in Net Interest Income - FTE Basis
Due to Change in (1)
Volume
Rate
Net Change
From 2020 to 2021

Due to Change in (1)
Volume
Rate
Net Change
From 2021 to 2022

(Dollars in millions)

Increase (decrease) in interest income
Interest-bearing deposits with the Federal Reserve, non-U.S. central banks and other
banks
Time deposits placed and other short-term investments
Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell
Trading account assets
Debt securities
Loans and leases
Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect and other consumer
Total consumer
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
Total commercial
Total loans and leases
Other earning assets
Net increase (decrease) in interest income
Increase (decrease) in interest expense
U.S. interest-bearing deposits
Demand and money market deposits
Time and savings deposits
Total U.S. interest-bearing deposits
Non-U.S. interest-bearing deposits
Total interest-bearing deposits
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to
repurchase
Short-term borrowings and other interest-bearing liabilities
Trading account liabilities
Long-term debt
Net increase (decrease) in interest expense
Net increase (decrease) in net interest income (2)
(1)

(2)

$

(35)
2
2
256
301

$

2,454
115
4,648
1,507
4,473

287
(125)
841
250

93
18
(205)
791

1,113
452
126
(59)

2,532
1,498
973
70

(144)

2,670

$

$

$

(18)
13

$

2,849
635

(4)

706

11
(238)
(63)
118

3,645
3,918
473
3,320

$

$

2,419
117
4,650
1,763
4,774

$

380
(107)
636
1,041
1,950
3,645
1,950
1,099
11
6,705
8,655
2,526
24,904

2,831
648
3,479
702
4,181
3,656
3,680
410
3,438
15,365
9,539

(1)
(4)
(128)
—
7,059

$

(186)
(10)
(865)
(362)
(4,494)

(612)
(245)
(994)
185

(731)
21
7
(454)

(553)
(147)
(89)
(80)

(553)
(309)
(205)
(17)

904

(1,122)

$

$

$

134
(39)
16

142
(4)
298
338

$

(797)
(525)

$

(195)

(910)
(573)
(144)
(1,228)
$

(187)
(14)
(993)
(362)
2,565
(1,343)
(224)
(987)
(269)
(2,823)
(1,106)
(456)
(294)
(97)
(1,953)
(4,776)
(218)
(3,985)

(663)
(564)
(1,227)
(179)
(1,406)
(768)
(577)
154
(890)
(3,487)
(498)

The changes for each category of interest income and expense are divided between the portion of change attributable to the variance in volume and the portion of change attributable to the
variance in rate for that category. The unallocated change in rate or volume variance is allocated between the rate and volume variances.
Includes an increase (decrease) in FTE basis adjustments of $11 million from 2021 to 2022 and $(72) million from 2020 to 2021.

Bank of America 2022 83

Business Segment Operations
Segment Description and Basis of Presentation
We report our results of operations through the following four business segments: Consumer Banking, GWIM, Global Banking and
Global Markets, with the remaining operations recorded in All Other. We manage our segments and report their results on an FTE
basis. The primary activities, products and businesses of the business segments and All Other are shown below.

We periodically review capital allocated to our businesses
and allocate capital annually during the strategic and capital
planning processes. We utilize a methodology that considers
the effect of regulatory capital requirements in addition to
internal risk-based capital models. Our internal risk-based
capital models use a risk-adjusted methodology incorporating
each segment’s credit, market, interest rate, business and
operational risk components. For more information on the
nature of these risks, see Managing Risk on page 93. The
capital allocated to the business segments is referred to as
allocated capital. Allocated equity in the reporting units is
comprised of allocated capital plus capital for the portion of
goodwill and intangibles specifically assigned to the reporting
unit. For more information, including the definition of a reporting
unit, see Note 7 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.

84 Bank of America 2022

For more information on our presentation of financial
information on an FTE basis, see Supplemental Financial Data
on page 79, and for reconciliations to consolidated total
revenue, net income and year-end total assets, see Note 23 –
Business Segment Information to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Key Performance Indicators
We present certain key financial and nonfinancial performance
indicators that management uses when evaluating segment
results. We believe they are useful to investors because they
provide additional information about our segments’ operational
performance, customer trends and business growth.

Consumer Banking
(Dollars in millions)

Net interest income
Noninterest income:
Card income
Service charges
All other income
Total noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income

$

$

Deposits
2021
2022
$
14,358
19,254

$

Consumer Lending
2021
2022
$
10,571
10,791

(36)
2,703
478
3,145
22,399

(28)
3,535
223
3,730
18,088

5,205
3
237
5,445
16,236

564
12,393
9,442
2,314
7,128

240
11,650
6,198
1,519
4,679

1,416
7,684
7,136
1,748
5,388

$

$

Total Consumer Banking
2021
2022
$
24,929
$
30,045

5,200
3
143
5,346
15,917

$

(1,275)
7,640
9,552
2,340
7,212

$

Effective tax rate (1)
Net interest yield
Return on average allocated capital
Efficiency ratio

1.48 %
39
64.41

1.82 %
55
55.33

3.77 %
27
48.00

3.72 %
20
47.32

5,169
2,706
715
8,590
38,635

5,172
3,538
366
9,076
34,005

1,980
20,077
16,578
4,062
12,516

(1,035)
19,290
15,750
3,859
11,891

$

24.5 %

24.5 %

2.73 %
31
51.96

2.45 %
31
56.73

% Change
21 %
—
(24)
95
(5)
14
n/m
4
5
5
5

Balance Sheet
Average
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets (2)
Total assets (2)
Total deposits
Allocated capital
Year End
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets (2)
Total assets (2)
Total deposits

$

4,161
1,057,531
1,090,692
1,056,783
13,000

$

4,431
973,018
1,009,387
976,093
12,000

$

288,205
289,719
296,499
5,778
27,000

$

279,630
280,080
285,532
6,934
26,500

$

292,366
1,099,410
1,139,351
1,062,561
40,000

$

284,061
1,016,751
1,058,572
983,027
38,500

3%
8
8
8
4

$

4,148
1,043,049
1,077,203
1,043,194

$

4,206
1,048,009
1,082,449
1,049,085

$

300,613
300,787
308,007
5,605

$

282,305
282,850
289,220
5,910

$

304,761
1,085,079
1,126,453
1,048,799

$

286,511
1,090,331
1,131,142
1,054,995

6%
—
—
(1)

(1)

Estimated at the segment level only.
In segments and businesses where the total of liabilities and equity exceeds assets, we allocate assets from All Other to match the segments’ and businesses’ liabilities and allocated
shareholders’ equity. As a result, total earning assets and total assets of the businesses may not equal total Consumer Banking.
n/m = not meaningful

(2)

Consumer Banking, comprised of Deposits and Consumer
Lending, offers a diversified range of credit, banking and
investment products and services to consumers and small
businesses. Deposits and Consumer Lending include the net
impact of migrating customers and their related deposit,
brokerage asset and loan balances between Deposits,
Consumer Lending and GWIM, as well as other client-managed
businesses. Our customers and clients have access to a coastto-coast network including financial centers in 38 states and the
District of Columbia. As of December 31, 2022, our network
includes approximately 3,900 financial centers, approximately
16,000 ATMs, nationwide call centers and leading digital
banking platforms with more than 44 million active users,
including approximately 35 million active mobile users.

Consumer Banking Results
Net income for Consumer Banking increased $625 million to
$12.5 billion due to higher revenue, partially offset by an
increase in provision for credit losses and higher noninterest
expense. Net interest income increased $5.1 billion to $30.0
billion primarily driven by higher interest rates and the benefits
of higher deposit and loan balances, partially offset by a lower
amount of accelerated net capitalized loan fees due to PPP loan
forgiveness, which primarily occurred in 2021. Noninterest
income decreased $486 million to $8.6 billion primarily driven
by the impact of non-sufficient funds and overdraft policy
changes, partially offset by a gain on the sale of an affinity card
loan portfolio in the fourth quarter of 2022.
The provision for credit losses increased $3.0 billion to $2.0
billion primarily driven by loan growth and a dampened

macroeconomic outlook in 2022, compared to a benefit in 2021
due to an improved macroeconomic outlook. Noninterest
expense increased $787 million to $20.1 billion primarily driven
by continued investments for business growth, including
marketing, technology and people, as well as increased client
activity, partially offset by an impairment charge for real estate
rationalization and the contribution to the Bank of America
Foundation in the prior year.
The return on average allocated capital was 31 percent,
unchanged from 2021. For more information on capital
allocated to the business segments, see Business Segment
Operations on page 84.

Deposits
Deposits includes the results of consumer deposit activities
that consist of a comprehensive range of products provided to
consumers and small businesses. Our deposit products include
noninterest- and interest-bearing checking accounts, money
market savings accounts, traditional savings accounts, CDs and
IRAs, as well as investment accounts and products. Net interest
income is allocated to deposit products using our funds transfer
pricing process that matches assets and liabilities with similar
interest rate sensitivity and maturity characteristics. Deposits
generates fees such as account service fees and ATM fees, as
well as investment and brokerage fees from Consumer
Investment accounts. Consumer Investments serves investment
client relationships through the Merrill Edge integrated investing
and banking service platform, providing investment advice and
guidance, client brokerage asset services, self-directed online
investing and key banking capabilities including access to the

Bank of America 2022 85

Corporation’s network of financial centers and ATMs.
Net income for Deposits increased $2.4 billion to $7.1
billion due to higher revenue, partially offset by higher
noninterest expense and an increase in provision for credit
losses. Net interest income increased $4.9 billion to $19.3
billion primarily due to higher interest rates and the benefit of
higher deposit balances. Noninterest income decreased $585
million to $3.1 billion primarily driven by the impact of nonsufficient funds and overdraft policy changes, partially offset by
higher other service charges due to increased client activity.
The provision for credit losses increased $324 million to
$564 million primarily driven by increased overdraft losses due
to higher payment activity related to checking accounts. The
benefit in the prior year was due to an improved macroeconomic
outlook. Noninterest expense increased $743 million to $12.4
billion primarily driven by continued investments for business
growth and increased client activity, partially offset by an
impairment charge for real estate rationalization in the prior
year.
Average deposits increased $80.7 billion to $1.1 trillion
primarily due to net inflows of $46.8 billion in checking and
$34.9 billion in money market savings largely driven by strong
organic growth.
The table below provides key performance indicators for
Deposits. Management uses these metrics, and we believe they
are useful to investors because they provide additional
information to evaluate our deposit profitability and digital/
mobile trends.

Year End
Consumer investment assets (in millions) (2)
Active digital banking users (in thousands) (3)
Active mobile banking users (in thousands) (4)
Financial centers
ATMs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(1)

2022

2021

1.86%

1.69%

$319,648
44,054
35,452
3,913
15,528

$368,831
41,365
32,980
4,173
16,209

Includes deposits held in Consumer Lending.
Includes client brokerage assets, deposit sweep balances and AUM in Consumer Banking.
Represents mobile and/or online active users over the past 90 days.
Represents mobile active users over the past 90 days.

Consumer investment assets decreased $49.2 billion to
$319.6 billion driven by market performance, partially offset by
client flows. Active mobile banking users increased
approximately two million, reflecting continuing changes in our
clients’ banking preferences. We had a net decrease of 260
financial centers and 681 ATMs as we continue to optimize our
consumer banking network.

Consumer Lending
Consumer Lending offers products to consumers and small
businesses across the U.S. The products offered include debit
and credit cards, residential mortgages and home equity loans,
and direct and indirect loans such as automotive, recreational
vehicle and consumer personal loans. In addition to earning net
interest spread revenue on its lending activities, Consumer
Lending generates interchange revenue from debit and credit
card transactions, late fees, cash advance fees, annual credit
card fees, mortgage banking fee income and other
miscellaneous fees. Consumer Lending products are available
to our customers through our retail network, direct telephone,
and online and mobile channels. Consumer Lending results also
include the impact of servicing residential mortgages and home

86 Bank of America 2022

Key Statistics – Consumer Lending
(Dollars in millions)

Key Statistics – Deposits
Total deposit spreads (excludes noninterest costs)

equity loans, including loans held on the balance sheet of
Consumer Lending and loans serviced for others.
Net income for Consumer Lending decreased $1.8 billion to
$5.4 billion primarily due to an increase in provision for credit
losses. Net interest income increased $220 million to $10.8
billion primarily due to higher interest rates and loan balances,
largely offset by a lower amount of accelerated net capitalized
loan fees due to PPP loan forgiveness, which primarily occurred
in 2021. Noninterest income increased $99 million to $5.4
billion primarily driven by a gain on the sale of an affinity card
loan portfolio in the fourth quarter of 2022.
The provision for credit losses increased $2.7 billion to $1.4
billion primarily driven by loan growth and a dampened
macroeconomic environment in 2022 compared to a benefit in
2021 due to an improved macroeconomic outlook. Noninterest
expense increased $44 million to $7.7 billion largely driven by
continued investments for business growth and increased client
activity, partially offset by the contribution to the Bank of
America Foundation in the prior year.
Average loans increased $8.6 billion to $288.2 billion
primarily driven by an increase in credit card loans and first
mortgage loans, partially offset by a decline in PPP loans.
The table below provides key performance indicators for
Consumer Lending. Management uses these metrics, and we
believe they are useful to investors because they provide
additional information about loan growth and profitability.

Total credit card (1)
Gross interest yield (2)
Risk-adjusted margin (3)
New accounts (in thousands)
Purchase volumes
Debit card purchase volumes
(1)
(2)
(3)

2022

2021

10.42 %
10.06
4,397
$356,588
$503,583

10.17 %
10.17
3,594
$311,571
$473,770

Includes GWIM's credit card portfolio.
Calculated as the effective annual percentage rate divided by average loans.
Calculated as the difference between total revenue, net of interest expense, and net credit
losses divided by average loans.

During 2022, the total risk-adjusted margin decreased 11
bps primarily driven by lower net interest margin and lower fee
income, partially offset by lower net credit losses. Total credit
card purchase volumes increased $45.0 billion to $356.6 billion
and debit card purchase volumes increased $29.8 billion to
$503.6 billion, reflecting higher levels of consumer spending.

Key Statistics – Loan Production (1)
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Consumer Banking:
First mortgage
Home equity
Total (2):
First mortgage
Home equity
(1)

(2)

2021

$

20,981
7,988

$ 45,976
3,996

$

44,765
9,591

$ 79,692
4,895

The loan production amounts represent the unpaid principal balance of loans and, in the
case of home equity, the principal amount of the total line of credit.
In addition to loan production in Consumer Banking, there is also first mortgage and home
equity loan production in GWIM.

First mortgage loan originations for Consumer Banking and
the total Corporation decreased $25.0 billion and $34.9 billion
during 2022 primarily driven by changes in demand.
Home equity production in Consumer Banking and the total
Corporation increased $4.0 billion and $4.7 billion during 2022
primarily driven by higher demand.

Global Wealth & Investment Management
(Dollars in millions)

Net interest income
Noninterest income:
Investment and brokerage services
All other income
Total noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income

$

$

Effective tax rate

2022
7,466

$

% Change
32 %

13,561
721
14,282
21,748

14,312
772
15,084
20,748

(5)
(7)
(5)
5

66
15,490
6,192
1,517
4,675

(241)
15,258
5,731
1,404
4,327

(127)
2
8
8
8

$

24.5 %

24.5 %

Net interest yield
Return on average allocated capital
Efficiency ratio

2021
5,664

1.51
26
73.54

1.95
27
71.23

Balance Sheet
Average
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets
Total assets
Total deposits
Allocated capital
Year end
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets
Total assets
Total deposits

GWIM consists of two primary businesses: Merrill Wealth
Management and Bank of America Private Bank.
Merrill Wealth Management’s advisory business provides a
high-touch client experience through a network of financial
advisors focused on clients with over $250,000 in total
investable assets. Merrill Wealth Management provides tailored
solutions to meet clients’ needs through a full set of investment
management, brokerage, banking and retirement products.
Bank of America Private Bank, together with Merrill Wealth
Management’s Private Wealth Management business, provides
comprehensive wealth management solutions targeted to high
net worth and ultra high net worth clients, as well as customized
solutions to meet clients’ wealth structuring, investment
management, trust and banking needs, including specialty asset
management services.
Net income for GWIM increased $348 million to $4.7 billion
driven by higher revenue, partially offset by higher provision for
credit losses and noninterest expense. The operating margin
remained unchanged at 28 percent compared to a year ago.
Net interest income increased $1.8 billion to $7.5 billion
due to the impacts of higher interest rates, as well as the
benefits of higher loan and deposit balances.
Noninterest income, which primarily includes investment and
brokerage services income, decreased $802 million to $14.3
billion primarily due to the impacts of lower market valuations
and declines in AUM pricing, partially offset by the impact of
positive AUM flows.

$

219,810
383,352
396,167
351,329
17,500

$

196,899
374,273
386,918
340,124
16,500

$

223,910
355,461
368,893
323,899

$

208,971
425,112
438,275
390,143

12 %
2
2
3
6

7
(16)
(16)
(17)

The provision for credit losses increased $307 million
primarily due to a dampened macroeconomic outlook and loan
growth in the current-year period, compared to a benefit in the
prior-year period due to an improved macroeconomic outlook.
Noninterest expense increased $232 million to $15.5 billion
primarily due to continued investments in the business, partially
offset by lower revenue-related incentives.
The return on average allocated capital was 27 percent, up
from 26 percent, due to higher net income, partially offset by an
increase in allocated capital. For more information on capital
allocated to the business segments, see Business Segment
Operations on page 84.
Average loans increased $22.9 billion to $219.8 billion
primarily due to residential mortgage, securities-based lending
and custom lending. Average deposits increased $11.2 billion
to $351.3 billion primarily driven by inflows from new and
existing accounts.
Merrill Wealth Management revenue of $18.1 billion
increased four percent primarily driven by the benefits of higher
interest rates, as well as higher deposit and loan balances,
partially offset by the impact of lower market valuations and
declines in AUM pricing.
Bank of America Private Bank revenue of $3.6 billion
increased nine percent primarily driven by the benefits of higher
interest rates, as well as higher deposit and loan balances,
partially offset by the impact of lower market valuations.

Bank of America 2022 87

Key Indicators and Metrics
Revenue by Business
Merrill Wealth Management
Bank of America Private Bank
Total revenue, net of interest expense

$
$

Client Balances by Business, at year end
Merrill Wealth Management
Bank of America Private Bank
Total client balances

$
$

Client Balances by Type, at year end
Assets under management
Brokerage and other assets
Deposits
Loans and leases (1)
Less: Managed deposits in assets under management
Total client balances

$

$

Assets Under Management Rollforward
Assets under management, beginning of year
Net client flows
Market valuation/other
Total assets under management, end of year
Total wealth advisors, at year end
(1)
(2)

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

(2)

18,135
3,613
21,748

$

2,822,910
563,931
3,386,841

$

1,401,474
1,482,025
323,899
226,973
(47,530)
3,386,841

$

1,638,782
20,785
(258,093)
1,401,474
19,273

$

$

$

$

$

17,448
3,300
20,748

3,214,881
625,453
3,840,334

1,638,782
1,655,021
390,143
212,251
(55,863)
3,840,334

1,408,465
66,250
164,067
1,638,782
18,846

Includes margin receivables which are classified in customer and other receivables on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Includes advisors across all wealth management businesses in GWIM and Consumer Banking.

Client Balances
Client balances managed under advisory and/or discretion of
GWIM are AUM and are typically held in diversified portfolios.
Fees earned on AUM are calculated as a percentage of clients’
AUM balances. The asset management fees charged to clients
per year depend on various factors but are commonly driven by
the breadth of the client’s relationship. The net client AUM flows
represent the net change in clients’ AUM balances over a

88 Bank of America 2022

specified period of time, excluding market appreciation/
depreciation and other adjustments.
Client balances decreased $453.5 billion, or 12 percent, to
$3.4 trillion at December 31, 2022 compared to December 31,
2021. The decrease in client balances was primarily due to the
impact of lower market valuations, partially offset by positive
client flows.

Global Banking
(Dollars in millions)

Net interest income
Noninterest income:
Service charges
Investment banking fees
All other income
Total noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income

$

$

Effective tax rate

2021
8,511

% Change
43 %

3,293
3,004
3,748
10,045
22,229

3,523
5,107
3,734
12,364
20,875

(7)
(41)
—
(19)
6

641
10,966
10,622
2,815
7,807

(3,201)
10,632
13,444
3,630
9,814

2022
12,184

$

$

27.0 %

26.5 %

Net interest yield
Return on average allocated capital
Efficiency ratio

(120)
3
(21)
(22)
(20)

1.55
23
50.93

2.26
18
49.34

Balance Sheet
Average
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets
Total assets
Total deposits
Allocated capital
Year end
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets
Total assets
Total deposits

Global Banking, which includes Global Corporate Banking, Global
Commercial Banking, Business Banking and Global Investment
Banking, provides a wide range of lending-related products and
services, integrated working capital management and treasury
solutions, and underwriting and advisory services through our
network of offices and client relationship teams. Our lending
products and services include commercial loans, leases,
commitment facilities, trade finance, commercial real estate
lending and asset-based lending. Our treasury solutions
business includes treasury management, foreign exchange,
short-term investing options and merchant services. We also
provide investment banking services to our clients such as debt
and equity underwriting and distribution, and merger-related and
other advisory services. Underwriting debt and equity issuances,
fixed-income and equity research, and certain market-based
activities are executed through our global broker-dealer
affiliates, which are our primary dealers in several countries.
Within Global Banking, Global Corporate Banking clients
generally include large global corporations, financial institutions
and leasing clients. Global Commercial Banking clients generally
include middle-market companies, commercial real estate firms
and not-for-profit companies. Business Banking clients include
mid-sized U.S.-based businesses requiring customized and
integrated financial advice and solutions.
Net income for Global Banking decreased $2.0 billion to
$7.8 billion driven by higher provision for credit losses and
noninterest expense, partially offset by higher revenue.
Net interest income increased $3.7 billion to $12.2 billion
primarily due to the benefits of higher interest rates and loan
balances.

$

375,271
539,032
603,273
511,804
44,500

$

329,655
549,749
611,304
522,790
42,500

14 %
(2)
(1)
(2)
5

$

379,107
522,539
588,466
498,661

$

352,933
574,583
638,131
551,752

7%
(9)
(8)
(10)

Noninterest income decreased $2.3 billion to $10.0 billion
driven by lower investment banking fees and valuation
adjustments on leveraged loans, as well as lower treasury
service charges.
The provision for credit losses increased $3.8 billion to
$641 million primarily driven by a dampened macroeconomic
outlook and loan growth, compared to a benefit in the prior year
due to an improved macroeconomic outlook.
Noninterest expense increased $334 million to $11.0
billion, primarily due to continued investments in the business,
including strategic hiring and technology.
The return on average allocated capital was 18 percent,
down from 23 percent, due to lower net income and higher
allocated capital. For more information on capital allocated to
the business segments, see Business Segment Operations on
page 84.

Global Corporate, Global Commercial and Business
Banking
Global Corporate, Global Commercial and Business Banking
each include Business Lending and Global Transaction Services
activities. Business Lending includes various lending-related
products and services, and related hedging activities, including
commercial loans, leases, commitment facilities, trade finance,
real estate lending and asset-based lending. Global Transaction
Services includes deposits, treasury management, credit card,
foreign exchange and short-term investment products.
The following table and discussion present a summary of the
results, which exclude certain investment banking and PPP
activities in Global Banking.

Bank of America 2022 89

Global Corporate, Global Commercial and Business Banking
Global Corporate Banking
2021
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Revenue
Business Lending
Global Transaction Services (1)
Total revenue, net of interest expense

$
$

4,325
5,002
9,327

$
$

3,723
3,235
6,958

Global Commercial Banking
2021
2022
$

4,316
4,166
8,482

$

$
$

3,675
3,341
7,016

Business Banking
2021
2022
$
$

251
1,213
1,464

$

Total

224
941
1,165

$

2021

2022
$

8,892
10,381
19,273

$

$

7,622
7,517
15,139

$

Balance Sheet
Average
Total loans and leases
Total deposits (1)

$

174,052
250,648

$

150,159
252,403

$

187,597
204,893

$

161,012
213,999

$

12,743
56,263

$

12,763
56,354

$

374,392
511,804

$

323,934
522,756

Year end
Total loans and leases
Total deposits (1)

$

174,905
262,033

$

163,027
260,826

$

191,051
186,112

$

175,228
233,007

$

12,683
50,516

$

12,822
57,886

$

378,639
498,661

$

351,077
551,719

(1)

Prior periods have been revised to conform to current-period presentation.

Business Lending revenue increased $1.3 billion in 2022
compared to 2021 primarily due to the benefits of higher
interest rates and loan balances.
Global Transaction Services revenue increased $2.9 billion
in 2022 compared to 2021 driven by higher interest rates,
partially offset by lower treasury service charges.
Average loans and leases increased 16 percent in 2022
compared to 2021 due to higher client demand. Average
deposits decreased two percent due to declines in domestic
balances.

Global Investment Banking
Client teams and product specialists underwrite and distribute
debt, equity and loan products, and provide advisory services
and tailored risk management solutions. The economics of
certain investment banking and underwriting activities are
shared primarily between Global Banking and Global Markets
under an internal revenue-sharing arrangement. Global Banking
originates certain deal-related transactions with our corporate
and commercial clients that are executed and distributed by
Global Markets. To provide a complete discussion of our

90 Bank of America 2022

consolidated investment banking fees, the table below presents
total Corporation investment banking fees and the portion
attributable to Global Banking.

Investment Banking Fees
Global Banking
2021
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Products
Advisory
Debt issuance
Equity issuance
Gross investment
banking fees
Self-led deals
Total investment
banking fees

$

1,643
1,099
262

$

2,926

$

5,107
(93)

3,004
(78)
$

2,139
1,736
1,232

Total Corporation
2021
2022

$

5,014

1,783
2,523
709

$

9,110
(223)

5,015
(192)
$

4,823

2,311
4,015
2,784

$

8,887

Total Corporation investment banking fees, which exclude
self-led deals and are primarily included within Global Banking
and Global Markets, decreased 46 percent to $4.8 billion
primarily due to lower equity issuance, debt issuance and
advisory fees.

Global Markets
(Dollars in millions)

Net interest income
Noninterest income:
Investment and brokerage services
Investment banking fees
Market making and similar activities
All other income
Total noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income

$

$

Effective tax rate

Year end
Total trading-related assets
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets
Total assets
Total deposits

Global Markets offers sales and trading services and research
services to institutional clients across fixed-income, credit,
currency, commodity and equity businesses. Global Markets
product coverage includes securities and derivative products in
both the primary and secondary markets. Global Markets
provides market-making, financing, securities clearing,
settlement and custody services globally to our institutional
investor clients in support of their investing and trading
activities. We also work with our commercial and corporate
clients to provide risk management products using interest rate,
equity, credit, currency and commodity derivatives, foreign
exchange, fixed-income and mortgage-related products. As a
result of our market-making activities in these products, we may
be required to manage risk in a broad range of financial
products including government securities, equity and equitylinked securities, high-grade and high-yield corporate debt
securities, syndicated loans, MBS, commodities and assetbacked securities. The economics of certain investment banking
and underwriting activities are shared primarily between Global
Markets and Global Banking under an internal revenue-sharing
arrangement. Global Banking originates certain deal-related
transactions with our corporate and commercial clients that are
executed and distributed by Global Markets. For information on
investment banking fees on a consolidated basis, see page 90.
The following explanations for year-over-year changes for

$

2021
4,011

% Change
(23)%

2,002
1,820
11,406
(178)
15,050
18,138

1,979
3,616
8,760
889
15,244
19,255

1
(50)
30
(120)
(1)
(6)

28
12,420
5,690
1,508
4,182

65
13,032
6,158
1,601
4,557

(57)
(5)
(8)
(6)
(8)

$

26.0 %

26.5 %

Return on average allocated capital
Efficiency ratio
Balance Sheet
Average
Trading-related assets:
Trading account securities
Reverse repurchases
Securities borrowed
Derivative assets
Total trading-related assets
Total loans and leases
Total earning assets
Total assets
Total deposits
Allocated capital

2022
3,088

12
67.68

10
68.48

$

303,587
126,324
116,764
54,128
600,803
116,652
602,889
857,637
40,382
42,500

$

291,505
113,989
100,292
43,582
549,368
91,339
541,391
785,998
51,833
38,000

4%
11
16
24
9
28
11
9
(22)
12

$

564,769
127,735
587,772
812,489
39,077

$

491,160
114,846
561,135
747,794
46,374

15 %
11
5
9
(16)

Global Markets, including those disclosed under Sales and
Trading Revenue, are the same for amounts including and
excluding net DVA. Amounts excluding net DVA are a non-GAAP
financial measure. For more information on net DVA, see
Supplemental Financial Data on page 79.
Net income for Global Markets decreased $375 million to
$4.2 billion. Net DVA gains were $20 million compared to
losses of $54 million in 2021. Excluding net DVA, net income
decreased $431 million to $4.2 billion. These decreases were
primarily driven by lower revenue, partially offset by lower
noninterest expense.
Revenue decreased $1.1 billion to $18.1 billion primarily
due to lower investment banking fees, partially offset by higher
sales and trading revenue. Sales and trading revenue increased
$1.3 billion, and excluding net DVA, sales and trading revenue
increased $1.2 billion. These increases were driven by higher
revenue in both FICC and Equities.
Noninterest expense decreased $612 million to $12.4
billion primarily driven by the realignment of a liquidating
business activity from Global Markets to All Other in the fourth
quarter of 2021 and an acceleration of expenses from incentive
compensation award changes in the prior year.
Average total assets increased $71.6 billion to $857.6
billion driven by loan growth and commodities activity in FICC.
Period-end total assets increased $64.7 billion to $812.5 billion

Bank of America 2022 91

driven by loan growth, an increase in commodities activity, and
higher derivative balances due to higher interest rates.
The return on average allocated capital was 10 percent,
down from 12 percent, reflecting lower net income and an
increase in allocated capital. For more information on capital
allocated to the business segments, see Business Segment
Operations on page 84.

Sales and Trading Revenue
Sales and trading revenue includes unrealized and realized
gains and losses on trading and other assets which are
included in market making and similar activities, net interest
income, and fees primarily from commissions on equity
securities. Sales and trading revenue is segregated into fixedincome (government debt obligations, investment and noninvestment grade corporate debt obligations, commercial MBS,
residential mortgage-backed securities, collateralized loan
obligations, interest rate and credit derivative contracts),
currencies (interest rate and foreign exchange contracts),
commodities (primarily futures, forwards, swaps and options)
and equities (equity-linked derivatives and cash equity activity).
The following table and related discussion present sales and
trading revenue, substantially all of which is in Global Markets,
with the remainder in Global Banking. In addition, the following
table and related discussion also present sales and trading
revenue, excluding net DVA, which is a non-GAAP financial
measure. For more information on net DVA, see Supplemental
Financial Data on page 79.

Sales and Trading Revenue (1, 2, 3)
2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

Sales and trading revenue
Fixed income, currencies and commodities
Equities
Total sales and trading revenue

$

$

9,917
6,572
16,489

Sales and trading revenue, excluding net DVA
Fixed income, currencies and commodities
$
Equities
Total sales and trading revenue, excluding net DVA $

9,898
6,571
16,469

$

$

8,761
6,428
$ 15,189

(4)

(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

8,810
6,433
$ 15,243

For more information on sales and trading revenue, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Includes FTE adjustments of $354 million and $421 million for 2022 and 2021.
Includes Global Banking sales and trading revenue of $1.0 billion and $510 million for 2022
and 2021.
FICC and Equities sales and trading revenue, excluding net DVA, is a non-GAAP financial
measure. FICC net DVA gains (losses) were $19 million and $(49) million for 2022 and
2021. Equities net DVA gains (losses) were $1 million and $(5) million for 2022 and 2021.

Including and excluding net DVA, FICC revenue increased
$1.2 billion and $1.1 billion driven by improved trading
performance across interest rate and currency products,
partially offset by a weaker trading environment for credit
products in the current-year period and a gain in commodities
from a weather-related event in the prior year. Including and
excluding net DVA, Equities revenue increased $144 million and
$138 million driven by strong performances in derivatives and
client financing activities, partially offset by a weaker
performance in cash.

All Other
Net interest income
Noninterest income (loss)
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Net income (loss)

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

117
(5,479)
(5,362)
(172)
2,485
(7,675)
(6,023)
(1,652)

$

$

246
(5,589)
(5,343)

% Change
(52)%
(2)
—

(182)
1,519
(6,680)
(8,069)
1,389

(5)
64
15
(25)
n/m

Balance Sheet
Average
Total loans and leases
Total assets (1)
Total deposits

Year Ended December 31
2021
2022
18,447
$
12,683 $
191,831
139,466
16,512
20,082

% Change
(31)%
(27)
22

Year end
Total loans and leases
Total assets (1)
Total deposits

December 31
2022
$
10,234
155,074
19,905

December 31
2021
$
15,863
214,153
21,182

% Change
(35)%
(28)
(6)

(1)

In segments where the total of liabilities and equity exceeds assets, which are generally deposit-taking segments, we allocate assets from All Other to those segments to match liabilities (i.e.,
deposits) and allocated shareholders’ equity. Average allocated assets were $1.1 trillion for both 2022 and 2021, and year-end allocated assets were $1.0 trillion and $1.2 trillion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
n/m = not meaningful

All Other primarily consists of asset and liability management
(ALM) activities, liquidating businesses and certain expenses
not otherwise allocated to a business segment. ALM activities
encompass interest rate and foreign currency risk management
activities for which substantially all of the results are allocated
to our business segments. For more information on our ALM
activities, see Note 23 – Business Segment Information to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.

92 Bank of America 2022

Net income decreased $3.0 billion to a loss of $1.7 billion
primarily due to a lower income tax benefit and higher
noninterest expense.
Noninterest expense increased $966 million primarily driven
by the realignment of a liquidating business activity from Global
Markets to All Other in the fourth quarter of 2021, expense
associated with the settlement of the legacy monoline insurance
litigation and expense related to certain regulatory matters,
partially offset by decreases in other expenses.

The income tax benefit was $6.0 billion in 2022 compared
to a benefit of $8.1 billion in 2021. The decrease in the tax
benefit was primarily driven by the impact of the U.K. tax law
change in 2021. For more information, see Financial Highlights Income Tax Expense on page 76. Both periods included income
tax benefit adjustments to eliminate the FTE treatment of
certain tax credits recorded in Global Banking and Global
Markets.

Managing Risk
Risk is inherent in all our business activities. Sound risk
management enables us to serve our customers and deliver for
our shareholders. If not managed well, risk can result in
financial loss, regulatory sanctions and penalties, and damage
to our reputation, each of which may adversely impact our ability
to execute our business strategies. We take a comprehensive
approach to risk management with a defined Risk Framework
and an articulated Risk Appetite Statement, which are approved
annually by the ERC and the Board.
The seven key types of risk faced by the Corporation are
strategic, credit, market, liquidity, compliance, operational and
reputational.
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

Strategic risk is the risk to current or projected financial
condition arising from incorrect assumptions about external
or internal factors, inappropriate business plans, ineffective
business strategy execution or failure to respond in a timely
manner to changes in the regulatory, macroeconomic or
competitive environments in the geographic locations in
which we operate.
Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the inability or
failure of a borrower or counterparty to meet its obligations.
Market risk is the risk that changes in market conditions
adversely impact the value of assets or liabilities or
otherwise negatively impact earnings. Market risk is
composed of price risk and interest rate risk.
Liquidity risk is the inability to meet expected or unexpected
cash flow and collateral needs while continuing to support
our businesses and customers under a range of economic
conditions.
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions,
material financial loss or damage to the reputation of the
Corporation arising from the failure of the Corporation to
comply with the requirements of applicable laws, rules and
regulations and our internal policies and procedures.
Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate
or failed internal processes or systems, people or external
events.
Reputational risk is the risk that negative perception of the
Corporation may adversely impact profitability or operations.

The following sections address in more detail the specific
procedures, measures and analyses of the major categories of
risk. This discussion of managing risk focuses on the current
Risk Framework that, as part of its annual review process, was
approved by the ERC and the Board.
As set forth in our Risk Framework, a culture of managing
risk well is fundamental to our values and our purpose, and how
we drive Responsible Growth. It requires us to focus on risk in
all activities and encourages the necessary mindset and
behavior to enable effective risk management and promote
sound risk-taking within our risk appetite. Sustaining a culture of
managing risk well throughout the organization is critical to the
success of the Corporation and is a clear expectation of our
executive management team and the Board.

Our Risk Framework serves as the foundation for the
consistent and effective management of risks facing the
Corporation. The Risk Framework sets forth roles and
responsibilities for the management of risk and provides a
blueprint for how the Board, through delegation of authority to
committees and executive officers, establishes risk appetite
and associated limits for our activities.
Executive management assesses, with Board oversight, the
risk-adjusted returns of each business. Management reviews
and approves the strategic and financial operating plans, as well
as the capital plan and Risk Appetite Statement, and
recommends them annually to the Board for approval. Our
strategic plan takes into consideration return objectives and
financial resources, which must align with risk capacity and risk
appetite. Management sets financial objectives for each
business by allocating capital and setting a target for return on
capital for each business. Capital allocations and operating
limits are regularly evaluated as part of our overall governance
processes as the businesses and the economic environment in
which we operate continue to evolve. For more information
regarding capital allocations, see Business Segment Operations
on page 84.
The Corporation’s risk appetite indicates the amount of
capital, earnings or liquidity we are willing to put at risk to
achieve our strategic objectives and business plans, consistent
with applicable regulatory requirements. Our risk appetite
provides a common framework that includes a set of measures
to assist senior management and the Board in assessing the
Corporation’s risk profile against our risk appetite and risk
capacity. Our risk appetite is formally articulated in the Risk
Appetite Statement, which includes both qualitative statements
and quantitative limits.
Our overall capacity to take risk is limited; therefore, we
prioritize the risks we take in order to maintain a strong and
flexible financial position so we can withstand challenging
economic conditions and take advantage of organic growth
opportunities. Therefore, we set objectives and targets for
capital and liquidity that are intended to permit us to continue to
operate in a safe and sound manner at all times, including
during periods of stress.
Our lines of business operate with risk limits that align with
the Corporation’s risk appetite. Senior management is
responsible
for
tracking
and
reporting
performance
measurements as well as any exceptions to risk appetite limits.
The Board, and its committees when appropriate, oversee
financial performance, execution of the strategic and financial
operating plans, adherence to risk appetite limits and the
adequacy of internal controls.
For a more detailed discussion of our risk management
activities, see the discussion below and pages 96 through 129.

Risk Management Governance
The Risk Framework describes delegations of authority whereby
the Board and its committees may delegate authority to
management-level committees or executive officers. Such
delegations may authorize certain decision-making and approval
functions, which may be evidenced in documents such as
committee charters, job descriptions, meeting minutes and
resolutions.
The chart below illustrates the interrelationship among the
Board, Board committees and management committees that
have the majority of risk oversight responsibilities for the
Corporation.

Bank of America 2022 93

Boa rd of Dire ctors

I
Corpo rate

- - - -

Board
Committees

I
I
I

Audit Committee

Enterprise Risk
Committee

Governance. ESG.

and Sustainability
Committee

Compensation and
Human Capital
Committee

I

I
Disclosure

Managemen t

Committees

I

Committee

11

>

Management Ris k

Regu lation 0

Responsible Growth

Corporate Benefits

Committee

Committee

Committee

Committee

Management
Compensation
Committee

'" Reports to the CEO and CFO with oversight by the Audit Committee

Board of Directors and Board Committees
The Board is composed of 15 directors, all but one of whom are
independent. The Board authorizes management to maintain
an effective Risk Framework and oversees compliance with safe
and sound banking practices. In addition, the Board or its
committees conduct inquiries of, and receive reports from
senior management on, risk-related matters to assess scope or
resource limitations that could impede the ability of Global Risk
Management (GRM) and/or Corporate Audit to execute its
responsibilities. The Board committees discussed below have
the principal responsibility for enterprise-wide oversight of our
risk management activities. Through these activities, the Board
and applicable committees are provided with information on our
risk profile and oversee senior management addressing key
risks we face. Other Board committees, as described below,
provide additional oversight of specific risks.
Each of the committees shown on the above chart regularly
reports to the Board on risk-related matters within the
committee’s responsibilities, which is intended to collectively
provide the Board with integrated insight about our management
of enterprise-wide risks.

Audit Committee
The Audit Committee oversees the qualifications, performance
and independence of the Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm, the performance of our corporate audit
function, the integrity of our consolidated financial statements,
our compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, and
makes inquiries of senior management or the Chief Audit
Executive (CAE) to determine whether there are scope or
resource limitations that impede the ability of Corporate Audit to
execute its responsibilities. The Audit Committee is also
responsible for overseeing compliance risks pursuant to the
New York Stock Exchange listing standards.

Enterprise Risk Committee
The ERC oversees the Corporation’s Risk Framework, risk
appetite and senior management’s responsibilities for the
identification, measurement, monitoring and control of key risks
facing the Corporation. The ERC may consult with other Board
committees on risk-related matters.

Other Board Committees
Our Corporate Governance, ESG, and Sustainability Committee
oversees our Board’s governance processes, identifies and
reviews the qualifications of potential Board members, leads

94 Bank of America 2022

Board and committee succession planning and their formal selfevaluation, and reviews our ESG activities, shareholder input
and shareholder engagement process.
Our Compensation and Human Capital Committee oversees
establishing, maintaining and administering our compensation
programs and employee benefit plans, including approving and
recommending our Chief Executive Officer’s (CEO) compensation
to our Board for further approval by all independent directors;
reviewing and approving our executive officers’ compensation,
as well as compensation for non-management directors; and
reviewing certain other human capital management topics,
including pay equity and diversity and inclusion.

Management Committees
Management committees receive their authority from the Board,
a Board committee, or another management committee. Our
primary management risk committee is the MRC. Subject to
Board oversight, the MRC is responsible for management
oversight of key risks facing the Corporation, including an
integrated evaluation of risk, earnings, capital and liquidity.

Lines of Defense
We have clear ownership and accountability for managing risk
across three lines of defense: Front Line Units (FLUs), GRM and
Corporate Audit. We also have control functions outside of FLUs
and GRM (e.g., Legal and Global Human Resources). The three
lines of defense are integrated into our management-level
governance structure. Each of these functional roles is further
described in this section.

Executive Officers
Executive officers lead various functions representing the
functional roles. Authority for functional roles may be delegated
to executive officers from the Board, Board committees or
management-level committees. Executive officers, in turn, may
further delegate responsibilities, as appropriate, to
management-level committees, management routines or
individuals. Executive officers review our activities for
consistency with our Risk Framework, risk appetite, and
applicable strategic, capital and financial operating plans, as
well as applicable policies and standards. Executive officers and
other employees make decisions individually on a day-to-day
basis, consistent with the authority they have been delegated.
Executive officers and other employees may also serve on
committees and participate in committee decisions.

Front Line Units
FLUs, which include the lines of business as well as Global
Technology and Global Operations, are responsible for
appropriately assessing and effectively managing all of the risks
associated with their activities.
Three organizational units that include FLU activities and
control function activities, but are not part of GRM are first, the
Chief Financial Officer Group; second, the Chief Administrative
Officer Group; and third, Global Strategy and Enterprise
Platforms.

Global Risk Management
GRM is part of our control functions and operates as our
independent risk management function. GRM, led by the Chief
Risk Officer (CRO), is responsible for independently assessing
and overseeing risks within FLUs and other control functions.
GRM establishes written enterprise policies and procedures
outlining how aggregate risks are identified, measured,
monitored and controlled.
The CRO has the stature, authority and independence needed
to develop and implement a meaningful risk management
framework and practices to guide the Corporation in managing
risk. The CRO has unrestricted access to the Board and reports
directly to both the ERC and the CEO. GRM is organized into
horizontal risk teams that cover a specific risk area and vertical
CRO teams that cover a particular FLU or control function. These
teams work collaboratively in executing their respective duties.

Corporate Audit
Corporate Audit and the CAE maintain their independence from
the FLUs, GRM and other control functions by reporting directly
to the Audit Committee. The CAE administratively reports to the
CEO. Corporate Audit provides independent assessment and
validation through testing of key processes and controls across
the Corporation. Corporate Audit includes Credit Review, which
provides an independent assessment of credit lending decisions
and the effectiveness of credit processes across the
Corporation’s credit platform through examinations and
monitoring.

Risk Management Processes
The Risk Framework requires that strong risk management
practices are integrated in key strategic, capital and financial
planning processes and in day-to-day business processes
across the Corporation, thereby ensuring risks are appropriately
considered, evaluated and responded to in a timely manner. We
employ an effective risk management process, referred to as
Identify, Measure, Monitor and Control, as part of our daily
activities.
Identify – To be effectively managed, risks must be proactively
identified and well understood. Proper risk identification
focuses on recognizing and understanding key risks inherent
in our business activities or key risks that may arise from
external factors. Each employee is expected to identify and
escalate risks promptly. Risk identification is an ongoing
process that incorporates input from FLUs and control
functions. It is designed to be forward-looking and to capture
relevant risk factors across all of our lines of business.
Measure – Once a risk is identified, it must be prioritized and
accurately measured through a systematic process including
qualitative statements and quantitative limits. Risk is
measured at various levels, including, but not limited to, risk
type, FLU and legal entity, and also on an aggregate basis.
This risk measurement process helps to capture changes in
our risk profile due to changes in strategic direction,

concentrations, portfolio quality and the overall economic
environment. Senior management considers how risk
exposures might evolve under a variety of stress scenarios.
Monitor – We monitor risk levels regularly to track adherence to
risk appetite, policies and standards. We also regularly
update risk assessments and review risk exposures. Through
our monitoring, we know our level of risk relative to limits and
can take action in a timely manner. We also know when risk
limits are breached and have processes to appropriately
report and escalate exceptions. This includes timely requests
for approval to managers and alerts to executive
management, management-level committees or the Board
(directly or through an appropriate committee).
Control – We establish and communicate risk limits and controls
through policies, standards, procedures and processes. The
limits and controls can be adjusted by senior management or
the Board when conditions or risk tolerances warrant. These
limits may be absolute (e.g., loan amount, trading volume,
operational loss) or relative (e.g., percentage of loan book in
higher-risk categories). Our FLUs are held accountable for
performing within the established limits.
The formal processes used to manage risk represent a part
of our overall risk management process. We instill a strong and
comprehensive culture of managing risk well through
communications,
training,
policies,
procedures
and
organizational roles and responsibilities. Establishing a culture
reflective of our purpose to help make our customers’ financial
lives better and delivering on Responsible Growth is also critical
to effective risk management. We are committed to the highest
principles of ethical and professional conduct. Conduct risk is
the risk of improper actions, behaviors or practices by the
Corporation, its employees or representatives that are illegal,
unethical and/or contrary to our core values that could result in
harm to the Corporation, our shareholders or our customers,
damage the integrity of the financial markets, or negatively
impact our reputation. We have established protocols and
structures so that conduct risk is governed and reported across
the Corporation appropriately. All employees are held
accountable for adhering to the Code of Conduct, operating
within our risk appetite and managing risk in their daily business
activities. In addition, our performance management and
compensation practices encourage responsible risk-taking that
is consistent with our Risk Framework and risk appetite.

Corporation-wide Stress Testing
Integral to our Capital Planning, Financial Planning and Strategic
Planning processes, we conduct capital scenario management
and stress forecasting on a periodic basis to better understand
balance sheet, earnings and capital sensitivities to certain
economic and business scenarios, including economic and
market conditions that are more severe than anticipated. These
stress forecasts provide an understanding of the potential
impacts from our risk profile on the balance sheet, earnings and
capital, and serve as a key component of our capital and risk
management practices. The intent of stress testing is to
develop a comprehensive understanding of potential impacts of
on- and off-balance sheet risks at the Corporation and certain
subsidiaries and how they impact financial resiliency, which
provides confidence to management, regulators and our
investors.

Contingency Planning
We have developed and maintain contingency plans that are
designed to prepare us in advance to respond in the event of

Bank of America 2022 95

potential adverse economic, financial or market stress. These
contingency plans include our Capital Contingency Plan and
Financial Contingency and Recovery Plan, which provide
monitoring, escalation, actions and routines designed to enable
us to increase capital, access funding sources and reduce risk
through consideration of potential options that include asset
sales, business sales, capital or debt issuances, and other derisking strategies. We also maintain a Resolution Plan to limit
adverse systemic impacts that could be associated with a
potential resolution of Bank of America.

Strategic Risk Management
Strategic risk is embedded in every business and is one of the
major risk categories along with credit, market, liquidity,
compliance, operational and reputational risks. This risk results
from incorrect assumptions about external or internal factors,
inappropriate business plans, ineffective business strategy
execution, or failure to respond in a timely manner to changes in
the regulatory, macroeconomic or competitive environments in
the geographic locations in which we operate, such as
competitor actions, changing customer preferences, product
obsolescence and technology developments.
An aspect of strategic risk is the risk that the Corporation’s
capital levels are not adequate to meet minimum regulatory
requirements and support execution of business activities or
absorb losses from risks during normal or adverse economic
and market conditions. As such, capital risk is managed in
parallel to strategic risk.
We manage strategic risk through the Strategic Risk
Enterprise Policy and integration into the strategic planning
process, among other activities. Our strategic plan is consistent
with our risk appetite, capital plan and liquidity requirements,
and specifically addresses strategic risks impacting each
business.
On an annual basis, the Board reviews and approves the
strategic plan, capital plan, financial operating plan and Risk
Appetite Statement. With oversight by the Board, senior
management directs the lines of business to execute our
strategic plan consistent with our core operating principles and
risk appetite. The executive management team monitors
business performance throughout the year and provides the
Board with regular progress reports on whether strategic
objectives and timelines are being met, including reports on
strategic risks and if additional or alternative actions need to be
considered or implemented. The regular executive reviews focus
on assessing forecasted earnings and returns on capital, the
current risk profile, current capital and liquidity requirements,
staffing levels and changes required to support the strategic
plan, stress testing results, and other qualitative factors such
as market growth rates and peer analysis.
Significant strategic actions, such as capital actions,
material acquisitions or divestitures, and resolution plans are
reviewed and approved by the Board. At the business level,
processes are in place to discuss the strategic risk implications
of new, expanded or modified businesses, products or services
and other strategic initiatives, and to provide formal review and
approval where required. With oversight by the Board and the
ERC, executive management performs similar analyses
throughout the year, and evaluates changes to the financial
forecast or the risk, capital or liquidity positions as deemed
appropriate to balance and optimize achieving the targeted risk
appetite, shareholder returns and maintaining the targeted
financial strength. Proprietary models are used to measure the
capital requirements for credit, country, market, operational and
strategic risks. The allocated capital assigned to each business

96 Bank of America 2022

is based on its unique risk profile. With oversight by the Board,
executive management assesses the risk-adjusted returns of
each business in approving strategic and financial operating
plans. The businesses use allocated capital to define business
strategies, and price products and transactions.

Capital Management
The Corporation manages its capital position so that its capital
is more than adequate to support its business activities and
aligns with risk, risk appetite and strategic planning.
Additionally, we seek to maintain safety and soundness at all
times, even under adverse scenarios, take advantage of organic
growth opportunities, meet obligations to creditors and
counterparties, maintain ready access to financial markets,
continue to serve as a credit intermediary, remain a source of
strength for our subsidiaries, and satisfy current and future
regulatory capital requirements. Capital management is
integrated into our risk and governance processes, as capital is
a key consideration in the development of our strategic plan,
risk appetite and risk limits.
We conduct an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment
Process (ICAAP) on a periodic basis. The ICAAP is a forwardlooking assessment of our projected capital needs and
resources, incorporating earnings, balance sheet and risk
forecasts under baseline and adverse economic and market
conditions. We utilize periodic stress tests to assess the
potential impacts to our balance sheet, earnings, regulatory
capital and liquidity under a variety of stress scenarios. We
perform qualitative risk assessments to identify and assess
material risks not fully captured in our forecasts or stress tests.
We assess the potential capital impacts of proposed changes to
regulatory capital requirements. Management assesses ICAAP
results and provides documented quarterly assessments of the
adequacy of our capital guidelines and capital position to the
Board or its committees.
We periodically review capital allocated to our businesses
and allocate capital annually during the strategic and capital
planning processes. For more information, see Business
Segment Operations on page 84.

CCAR and Capital Planning
The Federal Reserve requires BHCs to submit a capital plan and
planned capital actions on an annual basis, consistent with the
rules governing the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review
(CCAR) capital plan. Based on the results of our 2022 CCAR
stress test, our stress capital buffer (SCB) increased to 3.4
percent from 2.5 percent, effective October 1, 2022 through
September 30, 2023.
In October 2021, the Board authorized the Corporation’s
$25 billion common stock repurchase program. Additionally, the
Board authorized common stock repurchases to offset shares
awarded under the Corporation’s equity-based compensation
plans. Pursuant to the Board’s authorizations, during 2022, we
repurchased $5.1 billion of common stock, including
repurchases to offset shares awarded under equity-based
compensation plans.
The timing and amount of common stock repurchases are
subject to various factors, including the Corporation’s capital
position, liquidity, financial performance and alternative uses of
capital, stock trading price, regulatory requirements and general
market conditions, and may be suspended at any time. Such
repurchases may be effected through open market purchases or
privately negotiated transactions, including repurchase plans
that satisfy the conditions of Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act).

Regulatory Capital
As a financial services holding company, we are subject to
regulatory capital rules, including Basel 3, issued by U.S.
banking regulators. Basel 3 established minimum capital ratios
and buffer requirements and outlined two methods of
calculating risk-weighted assets (RWA), the Standardized
approach and the Advanced approaches. The Standardized
approach relies primarily on supervisory risk weights based on
exposure type, and the Advanced approaches determine risk
weights based on internal models.
The Corporation's depository institution subsidiaries are also
subject to the Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) framework. The
Corporation and its primary affiliated banking entity, BANA, are
Advanced approaches institutions under Basel 3 and are
required to report regulatory risk-based capital ratios and RWA
under both the Standardized and Advanced approaches. The
lower of the capital ratios under Standardized or Advanced
approaches compared to their respective regulatory capital ratio
requirements are used to assess capital adequacy, including
under the PCA framework. As of December 31, 2022, the
common equity tier 1 (CET1), Tier 1 capital and Total capital
ratios under the Standardized approach were the binding ratios.

Minimum Capital Requirements

In order to avoid restrictions on capital distributions and
discretionary bonus payments, the Corporation must meet riskbased capital ratio requirements that include a capital
conservation buffer of 2.5 percent (under the Advanced
approaches only), an SCB (under the Standardized approach
only), plus any applicable countercyclical capital buffer and a
global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge. The
buffers and surcharge must be comprised solely of CET1
capital. For the period from October 1, 2021 through September
30, 2022, the Corporation's minimum CET1 capital ratio
requirement was 9.5 percent under both the Standardized and
Advanced approaches. Based on the results of our 2022 CCAR
stress test, the Corporation’s SCB increased to 3.4 percent,
resulting in a minimum CET1 capital ratio requirement of 10.4
percent under the Standardized approach for the period from
October 1, 2022 through September 30, 2023. Our minimum
CET1 capital ratio requirement under the Advanced approaches

remains unchanged at 9.5 percent.
The Corporation is required to calculate its G-SIB surcharge
on an annual basis under two methods and is subject to the
higher of the resulting two surcharges. Method 1 is consistent
with the approach prescribed by the Basel Committee’s
assessment methodology and is calculated using specified
indicators of systemic importance. Method 2 modifies the
Method 1 approach by, among other factors, including a
measure of the Corporation’s reliance on short-term wholesale
funding. The Corporation’s G-SIB surcharge, which is higher
under Method 2, is expected to increase to 3.0 percent from
2.5 percent on January 1, 2024, which will increase our
minimum CET1 capital ratio requirement. At December 31,
2022, the Corporation’s CET1 capital ratio of 11.2 percent
under the Standardized approach exceeded its current CET1
capital ratio requirement as well as the minimum requirement
expected to be in place as of January 1, 2024 due to an
anticipated increase in our G-SIB surcharge.
The Corporation is also required to maintain a minimum
supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) of 3.0 percent plus a
leverage buffer of 2.0 percent in order to avoid certain
restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus
payments. Our insured depository institution subsidiaries are
required to maintain a minimum 6.0 percent SLR to be
considered well capitalized under the PCA framework. The
numerator of the SLR is quarter-end Basel 3 Tier 1 capital. The
denominator is total leverage exposure based on the daily
average of the sum of on-balance sheet exposures less
permitted deductions, and applicable temporary exclusions, as
well as the simple average of certain off-balance sheet
exposures, as of the end of each month in a quarter.

Capital Composition and Ratios
Table 10 presents Bank of America Corporation’s capital ratios
and related information in accordance with Basel 3
Standardized and Advanced approaches as measured at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. For the periods presented
herein, the Corporation met the definition of well capitalized
under current regulatory requirements.

Bank of America 2022 97

Table 10 Bank of America Corporation Regulatory Capital under Basel 3
Standardized
Approach (1)
(Dollars in millions, except as noted)

Risk-based capital metrics:
Common equity tier 1 capital
Tier 1 capital
Total capital (3)
Risk-weighted assets (in billions)
Common equity tier 1 capital ratio
Tier 1 capital ratio
Total capital ratio
Leverage-based metrics:
Adjusted quarterly average assets (in billions) (4)
Tier 1 leverage ratio

$

$

Advanced
Approaches (1)
December 31, 2022

180,060
208,446
238,773
1,605
11.2 %
13.0
14.9

$

2,997
7.0 %

$

$

Supplementary leverage exposure (in billions)
Supplementary leverage ratio

180,060
208,446
230,916
1,411
12.8 %
14.8
16.4

Regulatory
Minimum (2)

10.4 %
11.9
13.9

2,997
7.0 %

4.0

3,523
5.9 %

5.0

December 31, 2021
Risk-based capital metrics:
Common equity tier 1 capital
Tier 1 capital
Total capital (3)
Risk-weighted assets (in billions)
Common equity tier 1 capital ratio
Tier 1 capital ratio
Total capital ratio
Leverage-based metrics:
Adjusted quarterly average assets (in billions) (4)
Tier 1 leverage ratio
Supplementary leverage exposure (in billions)
Supplementary leverage ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

$

$

171,759
196,465
227,592
1,618
10.6 %
12.1
14.1

$

3,087
6.4 %

$

$

171,759
196,465
220,616
1,399
12.3 %
14.0
15.8

9.5 %
11.0
13.0

3,087
6.4 %

4.0

3,604
5.5 %

5.0

Capital ratios as of December 31, 2022 and 2021 are calculated using the regulatory capital rule that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of the current expected credit
losses (CECL) accounting standard on January 1, 2020.
The capital conservation buffer and G-SIB surcharge were 2.5 percent at both December 31, 2022 and 2021. The Corporation's SCB applied in place of the capital conservation buffer under the
Standardized approach was 3.4 percent at December 31, 2022 and 2.5 percent at December 31, 2021. The countercyclical capital buffer for both periods was zero. The CET1 capital regulatory
minimum is the sum of the CET1 capital ratio minimum of 4.5 percent, our G-SIB surcharge of 2.5 percent and our capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent or the SCB, as applicable, of 3.4
percent at December 31, 2022 and 2.5 percent at December 31, 2021. The SLR regulatory minimum includes a leverage buffer of 2.0 percent.
Total capital under the Advanced approaches differs from the Standardized approach due to differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2 capital related to the qualifying allowance for credit
losses.
Reflects total average assets adjusted for certain Tier 1 capital deductions.

At December 31, 2022, CET1 capital was $180.1 billion, an
increase of $8.3 billion from December 31, 2021, due to
earnings, partially offset by dividends, common stock
repurchases and higher net unrealized losses on available-forsale debt securities included in accumulated other
comprehensive income (OCI). Tier 1 capital increased $12.0
billion primarily driven by the same factors as CET1 capital as
well as non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock issuances.
Total capital under the Standardized approach increased $11.2
billion primarily due to the same factors driving the increase in

98 Bank of America 2022

Tier 1 capital and an increase in the adjusted allowance for
credit losses included in Tier 2 capital, partially offset by a
decrease in subordinated debt. RWA under the Standardized
approach, which yielded the lower CET1 capital ratio at
December 31, 2022, decreased $13.0 billion during 2022 to
$1,605 billion primarily due to lower counterparty exposures in
Global Markets and a decrease in debt securities in the Treasury
portfolio, partially offset by loan growth. Supplementary leverage
exposure at December 31, 2022 decreased $80.3 billion
primarily due to lower debt securities, driven by lower deposits,
partially offset by loan growth.

Table 11 shows the capital composition at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 11 Capital Composition under Basel 3
(Dollars in millions)

Total common shareholders’ equity
CECL transitional amount (1)
Goodwill, net of related deferred tax liabilities
Deferred tax assets arising from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards
Intangibles, other than mortgage servicing rights, net of related deferred tax liabilities
Defined benefit pension plan net assets
Cumulative unrealized net (gain) loss related to changes in fair value of financial liabilities attributable to own creditworthiness,
net-of-tax
Accumulated net (gain) loss on certain cash flow hedges (2)
Other
Common equity tier 1 capital
Qualifying preferred stock, net of issuance cost
Other
Tier 1 capital
Tier 2 capital instruments
Qualifying allowance for credit losses (3)
Other
Total capital under the Standardized approach
Adjustment in qualifying allowance for credit losses under the Advanced approaches (3)
Total capital under the Advanced approaches
(1)
(2)
(3)

$

$

December 31
2021
2022
245,358
244,800 $
2,508
1,881
(68,641)
(68,644)
(7,743)
(7,776)
(1,605)
(1,554)
(1,261)
(867)
496
11,925
(201)
180,060
28,396
(10)
208,446
18,751
11,739
(163)
238,773
(7,857)
230,916

$

1,400
1,870
(127)
171,759
24,707
(1)
196,465
20,750
10,534
(157)
227,592
(6,976)
220,616

Includes the impact of the Corporation's adoption of the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2020 and 25 percent of the increase in reserves since the initial adoption.
Includes amounts in accumulated other comprehensive income related to the hedging of items that are not recognized at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Includes the impact of transition provisions related to the CECL accounting standard.

Table 12 shows the components of RWA as measured under Basel 3 at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 12 Risk-weighted Assets under Basel 3
Standardized
Advanced
Advanced
Approach
Approaches
Approaches
December 31
2021
2022
1,549 $
913
1,538 $
939 $
69
69
67
67
n/a
378
n/a
364
n/a
39
n/a
41
1,618 $
1,399
1,605 $
1,411 $

Standardized
Approach
(Dollars in billions)

Credit risk
Market risk
Operational risk (1)
Risks related to credit valuation adjustments
Total risk-weighted assets

$

$

(1)

December 31, 2022 includes the effects of an update made to our operational risk RWA model during the fourth quarter of 2022.
n/a = not applicable

Bank of America 2022 99

Bank of America, N.A. Regulatory Capital
Table 13 presents regulatory capital information for BANA in accordance with Basel 3 Standardized and Advanced approaches as
measured at December 31, 2022 and 2021. BANA met the definition of well capitalized under the PCA framework for both periods.

Table 13 Bank of America, N.A. Regulatory Capital under Basel 3
Standardized
Approach (1)
(Dollars in millions, except as noted)

Risk-based capital metrics:
Common equity tier 1 capital
Tier 1 capital
Total capital (3)
Risk-weighted assets (in billions)
Common equity tier 1 capital ratio
Tier 1 capital ratio
Total capital ratio
Leverage-based metrics:
Adjusted quarterly average assets (in billions) (4)
Tier 1 leverage ratio

$

$

Advanced
Approaches (1)
December 31, 2022

181,089
181,089
194,254
1,386
13.1 %
13.1
14.0

$

2,358
7.7 %

$

$

Supplementary leverage exposure (in billions)
Supplementary leverage ratio

181,089
181,089
186,648
1,087
16.7 %
16.7
17.2

Regulatory
Minimum (2)

7.0 %
8.5
10.5

2,358
7.7 %

5.0

2,785
6.5 %

6.0

December 31, 2021
Risk-based capital metrics:
Common equity tier 1 capital
Tier 1 capital
Total capital (3)
Risk-weighted assets (in billions)
Common equity tier 1 capital ratio
Tier 1 capital ratio
Total capital ratio
Leverage-based metrics:
Adjusted quarterly average assets (in billions) (4)
Tier 1 leverage ratio
Supplementary leverage exposure (in billions)
Supplementary leverage ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

$

$

182,526
182,526
194,773
1,352
13.5 %
13.5
14.4

$

2,414
7.6 %

$

$

182,526
182,526
188,091
1,048
17.4 %
17.4
17.9

7.0 %
8.5
10.5

2,414
7.6 %

5.0

2,824
6.5 %

6.0

Capital ratios as of December 31, 2022 and 2021 are calculated using the regulatory capital rule that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of the CECL accounting standard
on January 1,2020 .
Risk-based capital regulatory minimums at both December 31, 2022 and 2021 are the minimum ratios under Basel 3 including a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent. The regulatory
minimums for the leverage ratios as of both period ends are the percent required to be considered well capitalized under the PCA framework.
Total capital under the Advanced approaches differs from the Standardized approach due to differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2 capital related to the qualifying allowance for credit
losses.
Reflects total average assets adjusted for certain Tier 1 capital deductions.

Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Requirements
Total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) consists of the
Corporation’s Tier 1 capital and eligible long-term debt issued
directly by the Corporation. Eligible long-term debt for TLAC
ratios is comprised of unsecured debt that has a remaining
maturity of at least one year and satisfies additional
requirements as prescribed in the TLAC final rule. As with the

100 Bank of America 2022

risk-based capital ratios and SLR, the Corporation is required to
maintain TLAC ratios in excess of minimum requirements plus
applicable buffers to avoid restrictions on capital distributions
and discretionary bonus payments. Table 14 presents the
Corporation's TLAC and long-term debt ratios and related
information as of December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 14 Bank of America Corporation Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity and Long-Term Debt

465,451
29.0 %
13.2

Regulatory
Long-term
Minimum (2)
Debt
December 31, 2022
$ 243,833
22.0 %
15.2 %
9.5
6.9

435,904
26.9 %
12.1

December 31, 2021
$ 227,714
22.0 %
14.1 %
9.5
6.3

TLAC (1)
(Dollars in millions)

Total eligible balance
Percentage of risk-weighted assets (4)
Percentage of supplementary leverage exposure

$

Total eligible balance
Percentage of risk-weighted assets (4)
Percentage of supplementary leverage exposure

$

(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

Regulatory
Minimum (3)

8.5 %
4.5

8.5 %
4.5

As of December 31, 2022 and 2021, TLAC ratios are calculated using the regulatory capital rule that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of CECL.
The TLAC RWA regulatory minimum consists of 18.0 percent plus a TLAC RWA buffer comprised of 2.5 percent plus the Method 1 G-SIB surcharge of 1.5 percent. The countercyclical buffer is zero
for both periods. The TLAC supplementary leverage exposure regulatory minimum consists of 7.5 percent plus a 2.0 percent TLAC leverage buffer. The TLAC RWA and leverage buffers must be
comprised solely of CET1 capital and Tier 1 capital, respectively.
The long-term debt RWA regulatory minimum is comprised of 6.0 percent plus an additional 2.5 percent requirement based on the Corporation’s Method 2 G-SIB surcharge. The long-term debt
leverage exposure regulatory minimum is 4.5 percent.
The approach that yields the higher RWA is used to calculate TLAC and long-term debt ratios, which was the Standardized approach as of December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Regulatory Capital and Securities Regulation
The Corporation’s principal U.S. broker-dealer subsidiaries are
BofA Securities, Inc. (BofAS), Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing
Corp. (MLPCC) and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated (MLPF&S). The Corporation's principal European
broker-dealer subsidiaries are Merrill Lynch International (MLI)
and BofA Securities Europe SA (BofASE).
The U.S. broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to the net
capital requirements of Rule 15c3-1 under the Exchange Act.
BofAS computes its minimum capital requirements as an
alternative net capital broker-dealer under Rule 15c3-1e, and
MLPCC and MLPF&S compute their minimum capital
requirements in accordance with the alternative standard under
Rule 15c3-1. BofAS and MLPCC are also registered as futures
commission merchants and are subject to Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (CFTC) Regulation 1.17. The U.S. brokerdealer subsidiaries are also registered with the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc. (FINRA). Pursuant to FINRA
Rule 4110, FINRA may impose higher net capital requirements
than Rule 15c3-1 under the Exchange Act with respect to each
of the broker-dealers.
BofAS provides institutional services, and in accordance with
the alternative net capital requirements, is required to maintain
tentative net capital in excess of $5.0 billion and net capital in
excess of the greater of $1.0 billion or a certain percentage of
its reserve requirement in addition to a certain percentage of
securities-based swap risk margin. BofAS must also notify the
SEC in the event its tentative net capital is less than $6.0
billion. BofAS is also required to hold a certain percentage of its
customers' and affiliates' risk-based margin in order to meet its
CFTC minimum net capital requirement. At December 31, 2022,
BofAS had tentative net capital of $20.9 billion. BofAS also had
regulatory net capital of $17.5 billion, which exceeded the
minimum requirement of $4.1 billion.
MLPCC is a fully-guaranteed subsidiary of BofAS and
provides clearing and settlement services as well as prime
brokerage and arranged financing services for institutional
clients. At December 31, 2022, MLPCC’s regulatory net capital
of $7.5 billion exceeded the minimum requirement of $1.4
billion.
MLPF&S provides retail services. At December 31, 2022,
MLPF&S' regulatory net capital was $6.0 billion, which exceeded
the minimum requirement of $137 million.
Our European broker-dealers are subject to requirements
from U.S. and non-U.S. regulators. MLI, a U.K. investment firm,
is regulated by the Prudential Regulation Authority and the

Financial Conduct Authority and is subject to certain regulatory
capital requirements. At December 31, 2022, MLI’s capital
resources were $33.4 billion, which exceeded the minimum
Pillar 1 requirement of $11.6 billion.
BofASE is an authorized credit institution with its head office
located in France. Previously, BofASE had been authorized as an
investment firm, but following the European Union’s adoption of
the harmonized Investment Firm Directive and Investment Firm
Regulation prudential regime, it was required to apply for
reauthorization as a credit institution. The application was
approved in November 2022 and became effective on
December 8, 2022. BofASE is authorized and regulated by the
Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution and the Autorité
des Marchés Financiers, and supervised under the Single
Supervisory Mechanism by the European Central Bank. At
December 31, 2022, BofASE's capital resources were $9.0
billion, which exceeded the minimum Pillar 1 requirement of
$3.0 billion.
In addition, MLI and BofASE became conditionally registered
with the SEC as security-based swap dealers in the fourth
quarter of 2021, and maintained net liquid assets at
December 31, 2022 that exceeded the applicable minimum
requirements under the Exchange Act.

Liquidity Risk
Funding and Liquidity Risk Management
Our primary liquidity risk management objective is to meet
expected or unexpected cash flow and collateral requirements,
including payments under long-term debt agreements,
commitments to extend credit and customer deposit
withdrawals, while continuing to support our businesses and
customers under a range of economic conditions. To achieve
that objective, we analyze and monitor our liquidity risk under
expected and stressed conditions, maintain liquidity and access
to diverse funding sources, including our stable deposit base,
and seek to align liquidity-related incentives and risks. These
liquidity risk management practices have allowed us to
effectively manage the market fluctuation from the rising
interest rate environment, inflationary pressures and
macroeconomic environment.
We define liquidity as readily available assets, limited to
cash and high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities that we
can use to meet our contractual and contingent financial
obligations as they arise. We manage our liquidity position
through line-of-business and ALM activities, as well as through
our legal entity funding strategy, on both a forward and current

Bank of America 2022 101

(including intraday) basis under both expected and stressed
conditions. We believe that a centralized approach to funding
and liquidity management enhances our ability to monitor
liquidity requirements, maximizes access to funding sources,
minimizes borrowing costs and facilitates timely responses to
liquidity events.
The Board approves our liquidity risk policy and the Financial
Contingency and Recovery Plan. The ERC establishes our
liquidity risk tolerance levels. The MRC is responsible for
overseeing liquidity risks and directing management to maintain
exposures within the established tolerance levels. The MRC
reviews and monitors our liquidity position and stress testing
results, approves certain liquidity risk limits and reviews the
impact of strategic decisions on our liquidity. For more
information, see Managing Risk on page 93. Under this
governance framework, we developed certain funding and
liquidity risk management practices which include: maintaining
liquidity at Bank of America Corporation (Parent) and selected
subsidiaries, including our bank subsidiaries and other
regulated entities; determining what amounts of liquidity are
appropriate for these entities based on analysis of debt
maturities and other potential cash outflows, including those
that we may experience during stressed market conditions;
diversifying funding sources, considering our asset profile and
legal entity structure; and performing contingency planning.

NB Holdings Corporation
The Parent, which is a separate and distinct legal entity from our
bank and nonbank subsidiaries, has an intercompany
arrangement with our wholly-owned holding company subsidiary,
NB Holdings Corporation (NB Holdings). We have transferred,
and agreed to transfer, additional Parent assets not required to
satisfy anticipated near-term expenditures to NB Holdings. The
Parent is expected to continue to have access to the same flow
of dividends, interest and other amounts of cash necessary to
service its debt, pay dividends and perform other obligations as
it would have had it not entered into these arrangements and
transferred any assets. These arrangements support our
preferred single point of entry resolution strategy, under which
only the Parent would be resolved under the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code.
In consideration for the transfer of assets, NB Holdings
issued a subordinated note to the Parent in a principal amount
equal to the value of the transferred assets. The aggregate
principal amount of the note will increase by the amount of any
future asset transfers. NB Holdings also provided the Parent
with a committed line of credit that allows the Parent to draw
funds necessary to service near-term cash needs. These
arrangements support our preferred single point of entry
resolution strategy, under which only the Parent would be
resolved under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. These arrangements
include provisions to terminate the line of credit, forgive the
subordinated note and require the Parent to transfer its
remaining financial assets to NB Holdings if our projected
liquidity resources deteriorate so severely that resolution of the
Parent becomes imminent.

Global Liquidity Sources and Other Unencumbered Assets
We maintain liquidity available to the Corporation, including the
Parent and selected subsidiaries, in the form of cash and highquality, liquid, unencumbered securities. Our liquidity buffer,
referred to as Global Liquidity Sources (GLS), is comprised of

102 Bank of America 2022

assets that are readily available to the Parent and selected
subsidiaries, including holding company, bank and broker-dealer
subsidiaries, even during stressed market conditions. Our cash
is primarily on deposit with the Federal Reserve Bank and, to a
lesser extent, central banks outside of the U.S. We limit the
composition of high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities to
U.S. government securities, U.S. agency securities, U.S. agency
MBS and other investment-grade securities, and a select group
of non-U.S. government securities. We can obtain cash for these
securities, even in stressed conditions, through repurchase
agreements or outright sales. We hold our GLS in legal entities
that allow us to meet the liquidity requirements of our global
businesses, and we consider the impact of potential regulatory,
tax, legal and other restrictions that could limit the
transferability of funds among entities.
Table 15 presents average GLS for the three months ended
December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 15 Average Global Liquidity Sources

(Dollars in billions)

Bank entities
Nonbank and other entities (1)
Total Average Global Liquidity Sources
(1)

$
$

Three Months Ended
December 31
2021
2022
1,006
694 $
152
174
1,158
868 $

Nonbank includes Parent, NB Holdings and other regulated entities.

Our bank subsidiaries’ liquidity is primarily driven by deposit
and lending activity, as well as securities valuation and net debt
activity. Bank subsidiaries can also generate incremental
liquidity by pledging a range of unencumbered loans and
securities to certain FHLBs and the Federal Reserve Discount
Window. The cash we could have obtained by borrowing against
this pool of specifically-identified eligible assets was $348
billion and $322 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. We
have established operational procedures to enable us to borrow
against these assets, including regularly monitoring our total
pool of eligible loans and securities collateral. Eligibility is
defined in guidelines from the FHLBs and the Federal Reserve
and is subject to change at their discretion. Due to regulatory
restrictions, liquidity generated by the bank subsidiaries can
generally be used only to fund obligations within the bank
subsidiaries, and transfers to the Parent or nonbank
subsidiaries may be subject to prior regulatory approval.
Liquidity is also held in nonbank entities, including the
Parent, NB Holdings and other regulated entities. The Parent
and NB Holdings liquidity is typically in the form of cash
deposited at BANA, which is excluded from the liquidity at bank
subsidiaries, and high-quality, liquid, unencumbered securities.
Liquidity held in other regulated entities, comprised primarily of
broker-dealer subsidiaries, is primarily available to meet the
obligations of that entity, and transfers to the Parent or to any
other subsidiary may be subject to prior regulatory approval due
to regulatory restrictions and minimum requirements. Our other
regulated entities also hold unencumbered investment-grade
securities and equities that we believe could be used to
generate additional liquidity.
Table 16 presents the composition of average GLS for the
three months ended December 31, 2022 and December 31,
2021.

Table 16 Average Global Liquidity Sources Composition

(Dollars in billions)

Cash on deposit
$
U.S. Treasury securities
U.S. agency securities, mortgage-backed
securities, and other investment-grade securities
Non-U.S. government securities
Total Average Global Liquidity Sources
$

Three Months Ended
December 31
2021
2022
259
174 $
278
252
427
15
868

$

606
15
1,158

Our GLS are substantially the same in composition to what
qualifies as High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA) under the final
U.S. Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) rules. However, HQLA for
purposes of calculating LCR is not reported at market value, but
at a lower value that incorporates regulatory deductions and the
exclusion of excess liquidity held at certain subsidiaries. The
LCR is calculated as the amount of a financial institution’s
unencumbered HQLA relative to the estimated net cash outflows
the institution could encounter over a 30-day period of
significant liquidity stress, expressed as a percentage. Our
average consolidated HQLA, on a net basis, was $605 billion
and $617 billion for the three months ended December 31,
2022 and 2021. For the same periods, the average
consolidated LCR was 120 percent and 115 percent. Our LCR
fluctuates due to normal business flows from customer activity.

Liquidity Stress Analysis
We utilize liquidity stress analysis to assist us in determining
the appropriate amounts of liquidity to maintain at the Parent
and our subsidiaries to meet contractual and contingent cash
outflows under a range of scenarios. The scenarios we consider
and utilize incorporate market-wide and Corporation-specific
events, including potential credit rating downgrades for the
Parent and our subsidiaries, and more severe events including
potential resolution scenarios. The scenarios are based on our
historical experience, experience of distressed and failed
financial institutions, regulatory guidance, and both expected
and unexpected future events.
The types of potential contractual and contingent cash
outflows we consider in our scenarios may include, but are not
limited to, upcoming contractual maturities of unsecured debt
and reductions in new debt issuances; diminished access to
secured financing markets; potential deposit withdrawals;
increased draws on loan commitments, liquidity facilities and
letters of credit; additional collateral that counterparties could
call if our credit ratings were downgraded; collateral and margin
requirements arising from market value changes; and potential
liquidity required to maintain businesses and finance customer
activities. Changes in certain market factors, including, but not
limited to, credit rating downgrades, could negatively impact
potential contractual and contingent outflows and the related
financial instruments, and in some cases these impacts could
be material to our financial results.
We consider all sources of funds that we could access
during each stress scenario and focus particularly on matching
available sources with corresponding liquidity requirements by
legal entity. We also use the stress modeling results to manage
our asset and liability profile and establish limits and guidelines
on certain funding sources and businesses.

Net Stable Funding Ratio
The Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) is a liquidity requirement
for large banks to maintain a minimum level of stable funding
over a one-year period. The requirement is intended to support

the ability of banks to lend to households and businesses in
both normal and adverse economic conditions and is
complementary to the LCR, which focuses on short-term liquidity
risks. The U.S. NSFR applies to the Corporation on a
consolidated basis and to our insured depository institutions. At
December 31, 2022, the Corporation and its insured depository
institutions were in compliance with this requirement.

Diversified Funding Sources
We fund our assets primarily with a mix of deposits, and
secured and unsecured liabilities through a centralized, globally
coordinated funding approach diversified across products,
programs, markets, currencies and investor groups.
The primary benefits of our centralized funding approach
include greater control, reduced funding costs, wider name
recognition by investors and greater flexibility to meet the
variable funding requirements of subsidiaries. Where
regulations, time zone differences or other business
considerations make Parent funding impractical, certain other
subsidiaries may issue their own debt.
We fund a substantial portion of our lending activities
through our deposits, which were $1.93 trillion and $2.1 trillion
at December 31, 2022 and 2021. Deposits are primarily
generated by our Consumer Banking, GWIM and Global Banking
segments. These deposits are diversified by clients, product
type and geography, and the majority of our U.S. deposits are
insured by the FDIC. We consider a substantial portion of our
deposits to be a stable, low-cost and consistent source of
funding. We believe this deposit funding is generally less
sensitive to interest rate changes, market volatility or changes
in our credit ratings than wholesale funding sources. Our lending
activities may also be financed through secured borrowings,
including credit card securitizations and securitizations with
government-sponsored enterprises (GSE), the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA) and private-label investors, as well as FHLB
loans.
Our trading activities in other regulated entities are primarily
funded on a secured basis through securities lending and
repurchase agreements, and these amounts will vary based on
customer activity and market conditions. We believe funding
these activities in the secured financing markets is more costefficient and less sensitive to changes in our credit ratings than
unsecured financing. Repurchase agreements are generally
short-term and often overnight. Disruptions in secured financing
markets for financial institutions have occurred in prior market
cycles which resulted in adverse changes in terms or significant
reductions in the availability of such financing. We manage the
liquidity risks arising from secured funding by sourcing funding
globally from a diverse group of counterparties, providing a
range of securities collateral and pursuing longer durations,
when appropriate. For more information on secured financing
agreements, see Note 10 – Securities Financing Agreements,
Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted Cash to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Total long-term debt decreased $4.1 billion to $276.0 billion
during 2022 primarily due to debt maturities, redemptions and
valuation adjustments, partially offset by debt issuances. We
may, from time to time, purchase outstanding debt instruments
in various transactions, depending on market conditions,
liquidity and other factors. Our other regulated entities may also
make markets in our debt instruments to provide liquidity for
investors.
During 2022, we issued $66.0 billion of long-term debt
consisting of $44.2 billion of notes issued by Bank of America
Corporation, substantially all of which were TLAC compliant,

Bank of America 2022 103

$10.0 billion of notes issued by Bank of America, N.A. and
$11.8 billion of other debt. During 2021, we issued $76.7
billion of long-term debt consisting of $56.2 billion of notes
issued by Bank of America Corporation, substantially all of
which were TLAC compliant, $8 billion of notes issued by Bank
of America, N.A. and $12.5 billion of other debt.
During 2022, we had total long-term debt maturities and
redemptions in the aggregate of $33.3 billion consisting of
$19.8 billion for Bank of America Corporation, $9.9 billion for
Bank of America, N.A. and $3.6 billion of other debt. During
2021, we had total long-term debt maturities and redemptions
in the aggregate of $46.4 billion consisting of $24.4 billion for
Bank of America Corporation, $10.4 billion for Bank of America,
N.A. and $11.6 billion of other debt.
At December 31, 2022, Bank of America Corporation's
senior notes of $205.9 billion included $179.1 billion of
outstanding notes that are both TLAC eligible and callable at
least one year before their stated maturities. Of these senior
notes, $16.6 billion will be callable and become TLAC ineligible
during 2023, and $21.4 billion, $21.3 billion, $16.0 billion and
$24.4 billion will do so during each of 2024 through 2027,
respectively, and $79.4 billion thereafter.
We issue long-term unsecured debt in a variety of maturities
and currencies to achieve cost-efficient funding and to maintain
an appropriate maturity profile. While the cost and availability of
unsecured funding may be negatively impacted by general
market conditions or by matters specific to the financial
services industry or the Corporation, we seek to mitigate
refinancing risk by actively managing the amount of our
borrowings that we anticipate will mature within any month or
quarter. We may issue unsecured debt in the form of structured
notes for client purposes, certain of which qualify as TLACeligible debt. During 2022, we issued $12.5 billion of structured
notes, which are debt obligations that pay investors returns
linked to other debt or equity securities, indices, currencies or
commodities. We typically hedge the returns we are obligated to
pay on these liabilities with derivatives and/or investments in
the underlying instruments, so that from a funding perspective,
the cost is similar to our other unsecured long-term debt. We
could be required to settle certain structured note obligations
for cash or other securities prior to maturity under certain
circumstances, which we consider for liquidity planning
purposes. We believe, however, that a portion of such
borrowings will remain outstanding beyond the earliest put or
redemption date.
Substantially all of our senior and subordinated debt
obligations contain no provisions that could trigger a
requirement for an early repayment, require additional collateral
support, result in changes to terms, accelerate maturity or
create additional financial obligations upon an adverse change
in our credit ratings, financial ratios, earnings, cash flows or
stock price. For more information on long-term debt funding,
including issuances and maturities and redemptions, see Note
11 – Long-term Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We use derivative transactions to manage the duration,
interest rate and currency risks of our borrowings, considering
the characteristics of the assets they are funding. For more
information on our ALM activities, see Interest Rate Risk
Management for the Banking Book on page 126.

Uninsured Deposits
The FDIC insures the Corporation’s U.S. deposits up to
$250,000 per depositor, per insured bank for each account
ownership category, and various country-specific funds insure
non-U.S. deposits up to specified limits. Deposits that exceed

104 Bank of America 2022

insurance limits are uninsured. At December 31, 2022, the
Corporation’s deposits totaled $1.9 trillion, of which total
estimated uninsured U.S. and non-U.S. deposits were $617.6
billion and $102.8 billion. At December 31, 2021, the
Corporation’s deposits totaled $2.1 trillion, of which total
estimated uninsured U.S. and non-U.S. deposits were $701.4
billion and $111.9 billion.
Table 17 presents information about the Corporation’s total
estimated uninsured time deposits. For more information on our
liquidity sources, see Global Liquidity Sources and Other
Unencumbered Assets, and for more information on deposits,
see Diversified Funding Sources in this section. For more
information on contractual time deposit maturities, see Note 9 –
Deposits to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Table 17 Uninsured Time Deposits (1)

U.S.

(Dollars in millions)

Uninsured time deposits with a
maturity of:
3 months or less
Over 3 months through 6 months
Over 6 months through 12 months
Over 12 months
Total
(1)

$

$

December 31, 2022
Non-U.S.
Total

3,721
2,230
2,712
686
9,349

$

$

7,023
275
86
1,566
8,950

$

$

10,744
2,505
2,798
2,252
18,299

Amounts are estimated based on the regulatory methodologies defined by each local
jurisdiction.

Contingency Planning
We maintain contingency funding plans that outline our potential
responses to liquidity stress events at various levels of severity.
These policies and plans are based on stress scenarios and
include potential funding strategies and communication and
notification procedures that we would implement in the event we
experienced stressed liquidity conditions. We periodically review
and test the contingency funding plans to validate efficacy and
assess readiness.
Our U.S. bank subsidiaries can access contingency funding
through the Federal Reserve Discount Window. Certain non-U.S.
subsidiaries have access to central bank facilities in the
jurisdictions in which they operate. While we do not rely on
these sources in our liquidity modeling, we maintain the
policies, procedures and governance processes that would
enable us to access these sources if necessary.

Credit Ratings
Our borrowing costs and ability to raise funds are impacted
by our credit ratings. In addition, credit ratings may be important
to customers or counterparties when we compete in certain
markets and when we seek to engage in certain transactions,
including over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. Thus, it is our
objective to maintain high-quality credit ratings, and
management maintains an active dialogue with the major rating
agencies.
Credit ratings and outlooks are opinions expressed by rating
agencies on our creditworthiness and that of our obligations or
securities, including long-term debt, short-term borrowings,
preferred stock and other securities, including asset
securitizations. Our credit ratings are subject to ongoing review
by the rating agencies, and they consider a number of factors,
including our own financial strength, performance, prospects
and operations as well as factors not under our control. The
rating agencies could make adjustments to our ratings at any

time, and they provide no assurances that they will maintain our
ratings at current levels.
Other factors that influence our credit ratings include
changes to the rating agencies’ methodologies for our industry
or certain security types; the rating agencies’ assessment of the
general operating environment for financial services companies;
our relative positions in the markets in which we compete; our
various risk exposures and risk management policies and
activities; pending litigation and other contingencies or potential
tail risks; our reputation; our liquidity position, diversity of
funding sources and funding costs; the current and expected
level and volatility of our earnings; our capital position and
capital management practices; our corporate governance; the
sovereign credit ratings of the U.S. government; current or future
regulatory and legislative initiatives; and the agencies’ views on
whether the U.S. government would provide meaningful support
to the Corporation or its subsidiaries in a crisis.
On September 19, 2022, Fitch Ratings (Fitch) affirmed the
long-term and short-term senior debt ratings of the Corporation.
Fitch also affirmed and withdrew the long-term and short-term
ratings on certain subsidiaries, as they are no longer considered
relevant to the agency’s coverage.

On January 23, 2023, Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s)
placed the long-term rating of the Corporation as well as the
long-term rating of its rated subsidiaries, including BANA, on
review for upgrade. The agency cited the Corporation’s
strengthened capital ratios, improved earnings profile and
continued commitment to maintaining a restrained risk appetite
as drivers of the review. A review for upgrade indicates that
those ratings are under consideration for a change in the near
term and typically concludes within 90 days. Moody’s
concurrently affirmed all Prime-1 short-term ratings of the
Corporation and rated subsidiaries.
The current ratings and outlooks for the Corporation and its
subsidiaries from Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings (S&P) were
not the subject of any rating actions during 2022 or through
February 22, 2023.
Table 18 presents the Corporation’s current long-term/shortterm senior debt ratings and outlooks expressed by the rating
agencies.

Table 18 Senior Debt Ratings

Bank of America Corporation
Bank of America, N.A.
Bank of America Europe Designated
Activity Company
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated
BofA Securities, Inc.
Merrill Lynch International
BofA Securities Europe SA

Moody’s Investors Service
Long-term
Short-term
Outlook
Review for
A2
P-1
Upgrade
Review for
Aa2
P-1
Upgrade

Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings
Long-term
Short-term
Outlook

Long-term

Fitch Ratings
Short-term

Outlook

A-

A-2

Positive

AA-

F1+

Stable

A+

A-1

Positive

AA

F1+

Stable

NR

NR

NR

A+

A-1

Positive

AA

F1+

Stable

NR
NR
NR
NR

NR
NR
NR
NR

NR
NR
NR
NR

A+
A+
A+
A+

A-1
A-1
A-1
A-1

Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive

AA
AA
AA
AA

F1+
F1+
F1+
F1+

Stable
Stable
Stable
Stable

NR = not rated

A reduction in certain of our credit ratings or the ratings of
certain asset-backed securitizations may have a material
adverse effect on our liquidity, potential loss of access to credit
markets, the related cost of funds, our businesses and on
certain revenues, particularly in those businesses where
counterparty creditworthiness is critical. In addition, under the
terms of certain OTC derivative contracts and other trading
agreements, in the event of downgrades of our or our rated
subsidiaries’ credit ratings, the counterparties to those
agreements may require us to provide additional collateral, or to
terminate these contracts or agreements, which could cause us
to sustain losses and/or adversely impact our liquidity. If the
short-term credit ratings of our Parent, bank or broker-dealer
subsidiaries were downgraded by one or more levels, the
potential loss of access to short-term funding sources such as
repo financing and the effect on our incremental cost of funds
could be material.
While certain potential impacts are contractual and
quantifiable, the full scope of the consequences of a credit
rating downgrade to a financial institution is inherently
uncertain, as it depends upon numerous dynamic, complex and
inter-related factors and assumptions, including whether any
downgrade of a company’s long-term credit ratings precipitates
downgrades to its short-term credit ratings, and assumptions
about the potential behaviors of various customers, investors
and counterparties. For more information on potential impacts
of credit rating downgrades, see Liquidity Risk – Liquidity Stress

Analysis on page 103.
For more information on additional collateral and termination
payments that could be required in connection with certain overthe-counter derivative contracts and other trading agreements in
the event of a credit rating downgrade, see Note 3 – Derivatives
to the Consolidated Financial Statements herein and Item 1A.
Risk Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

Common Stock Dividends
For a summary of our declared quarterly cash dividends on
common stock during 2022 and through February 22, 2023,
see Note 13 – Shareholders’ Equity to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Finance Subsidiary Issuers and Parent Guarantor
BofA Finance LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (BofA
Finance), is a consolidated finance subsidiary of the Corporation
that has issued and sold, and is expected to continue to issue
and sell, its senior unsecured debt securities (Guaranteed
Notes) that are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the
Corporation. The Corporation guarantees the due and punctual
payment, on demand, of amounts payable on the Guaranteed
Notes if not paid by BofA Finance. In addition, each of BAC
Capital Trust XIII, BAC Capital Trust XIV and BAC Capital Trust
XV, Delaware statutory trusts (collectively, the Trusts), is a 100
percent owned finance subsidiary of the Corporation that has
issued and sold trust preferred securities (the Trust Preferred

Bank of America 2022 105

Securities) or capital securities (the Capital Securities and,
together with the Guaranteed Notes and the Trust Preferred
Securities, the Guaranteed Securities), as applicable, that
remained outstanding at December 31, 2022. The Corporation
guarantees the payment of amounts and distributions with
respect to the Trust Preferred Securities and Capital Securities
if not paid by the Trusts, to the extent of funds held by the
Trusts, and this guarantee, together with the Corporation’s other
obligations with respect to the Trust Preferred Securities and
Capital Securities, effectively constitutes a full and
unconditional guarantee of the Trusts’ payment obligations on
the Trust Preferred Securities or Capital Securities, as
applicable. No other subsidiary of the Corporation guarantees
the Guaranteed Securities.
BofA Finance and each of the Trusts are finance
subsidiaries, have no independent assets, revenues or
operations and are dependent upon the Corporation and/or the
Corporation’s other subsidiaries to meet their respective
obligations under the Guaranteed Securities in the ordinary
course. If holders of the Guaranteed Securities make claims on
their Guaranteed Securities in a bankruptcy, resolution or
similar proceeding, any recoveries on those claims will be
limited to those available under the applicable guarantee by the
Corporation, as described above.
The Corporation is a holding company and depends upon its
subsidiaries for liquidity. Applicable laws and regulations and
intercompany arrangements entered into in connection with the
Corporation’s resolution plan could restrict the availability of
funds from subsidiaries to the Corporation, which could
adversely affect the Corporation’s ability to make payments
under its guarantees. In addition, the obligations of the
Corporation under the guarantees of the Guaranteed Securities
will be structurally subordinated to all existing and future
liabilities of its subsidiaries, and claimants should look only to
assets of the Corporation for payments. If the Corporation, as
guarantor of the Guaranteed Notes, transfers all or substantially
all of its assets to one or more direct or indirect majority-owned
subsidiaries, under the indenture governing the Guaranteed
Notes, the subsidiary or subsidiaries will not be required to
assume the Corporation’s obligations under its guarantee of the
Guaranteed Notes.
For more information on factors that may affect payments to
holders of the Guaranteed Securities, see Liquidity Risk – NB
Holdings Corporation in this section, Item 1. Business of our
2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K and Part I. Item 1A. Risk
Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

Representations and Warranties Obligations
For information on representations and warranties obligations in
connection with the sale of mortgage loans, see Note 12 –
Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Credit Risk Management
Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the inability or failure
of a borrower or counterparty to meet its obligations. Credit risk
can also arise from operational failures that result in an
erroneous advance, commitment or investment of funds. We
define the credit exposure to a borrower or counterparty as the
loss potential arising from all product classifications including
loans and leases, deposit overdrafts, derivatives, assets heldfor-sale and unfunded lending commitments, which include loan
commitments, letters of credit and financial guarantees.
Derivative positions are recorded at fair value, and assets heldfor-sale are recorded at either fair value or the lower of cost or

106 Bank of America 2022

fair value. Certain loans and unfunded commitments are
accounted for under the fair value option. Credit risk for
categories of assets carried at fair value is not accounted for as
part of the allowance for credit losses but as part of the fair
value adjustments recorded in earnings. For derivative positions,
our credit risk is measured as the net cost in the event the
counterparties with contracts in which we are in a gain position
fail to perform under the terms of those contracts. We use the
current fair value to represent credit exposure without giving
consideration to future mark-to-market changes. The credit risk
amounts take into consideration the effects of legally
enforceable master netting agreements and cash collateral. Our
consumer and commercial credit extension and review
procedures encompass funded and unfunded credit exposures.
For more information on derivatives and credit extension
commitments, see Note 3 – Derivatives and Note 12 –
Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
We manage credit risk based on the risk profile of the
borrower or counterparty, repayment sources, the nature of
underlying collateral and other support given current events,
conditions and expectations. We classify our portfolios as either
consumer or commercial and monitor credit risk in each as
discussed below.
We refine our underwriting and credit risk management
practices as well as credit standards to meet the changing
economic environment. To mitigate losses and enhance
customer support in our consumer businesses, we have in
place collection programs and loan modification and customer
assistance infrastructures. We utilize a number of actions to
mitigate losses in the commercial businesses including
increasing the frequency and intensity of portfolio monitoring,
hedging activity and our practice of transferring management of
deteriorating commercial exposures to independent special
asset officers as credits enter criticized categories.
During 2022, asset quality generally improved compared to
2021. Our 2022 net charge-off ratio remained near historic
lows, and nonperforming loans and commercial reservable
criticized utilized exposure decreased compared to 2021, which
was partially offset by an increase in reservable criticized
exposure associated with our direct exposure to Russia as a
result of the Russia/Ukraine conflict. While uncertainty around
the pandemic has diminished, uncertainty remains regarding
broader economic impacts as a result of inflationary pressures,
rising rates and the current geopolitical situation and could lead
to adverse impacts to credit quality metrics in future periods.
For information on our credit risk management activities, see
Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk Management below, Commercial
Portfolio Credit Risk Management on page 111, Non-U.S.
Portfolio on page 117, Allowance for Credit Losses on page
120, and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance
for Credit Losses to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For
more information on the factors that may expose us to credit
risk, see Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors of our 2022 Annual
Report on Form 10-K.

Consumer Portfolio Credit Risk Management
Credit risk management for the consumer portfolio begins with
initial underwriting and continues throughout a borrower’s credit
cycle. Statistical techniques in conjunction with experiential
judgment are used in all aspects of portfolio management
including underwriting, product pricing, risk appetite, setting
credit limits, and establishing operating processes and metrics
to quantify and balance risks and returns. Statistical models are
built using detailed behavioral information from external

sources, such as credit bureaus, and/or internal historical
experience and are a component of our consumer credit risk
management process. These models are used in part to assist
in making both new and ongoing credit decisions as well as
portfolio management strategies, including authorizations and
line management, collection practices and strategies, and
determination of the allowance for loan and lease losses and
allocated capital for credit risk.

decreases from consumer real estate loan sales, partially offset
by increases from loans whose prior-period deferrals expired
and were modified in troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) during
the first quarter of 2022.
The consumer allowance for loan and lease losses increased
$204 million during 2022 to $7.2 billion. For more information,
see Allowance for Credit Losses on page 120.
For more information on our accounting policies regarding
delinquencies, nonperforming status, charge-offs and TDRs for
the consumer portfolio, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and
Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Table 19 presents our outstanding consumer loans and
leases, consumer nonperforming loans and accruing consumer
loans past due 90 days or more.

Consumer Credit Portfolio
During 2022, the U.S. unemployment rate continued to decline
and home prices increased compared to 2021, although they
began to decline in the second half of 2022 as inflationary
pressures continued to persist. During 2022, net charge-offs
were $1.9 billion, relatively unchanged compared to 2021.
During 2022, nonperforming loans declined primarily due to

Table 19 Consumer Credit Quality
Outstandings
(Dollars in millions)

Residential mortgage (1)
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer (2)
Other consumer
Consumer loans excluding loans accounted for under the fair
value option
Loans accounted for under the fair value option (3)
Total consumer loans and leases
Percentage of outstanding consumer loans and leases (4)
Percentage of outstanding consumer loans and leases,
excluding fully-insured loan portfolios (4)

$

$
$

2022
229,670
26,563
93,421
106,236
156
456,046
339
456,385
n/a
n/a

$

$
$

2021
221,963
27,935
81,438
103,560
190
435,086
618
435,704
n/a
n/a

$

$

Nonperforming
December 31
2021
2022
$
2,284
2,167
630
510
n/a
n/a
75
77
—
—
$

2,754

2,989

Accruing Past Due
90 Days or More

$

$

2022
368
—
717
2
—
1,087

$

$

2021
634
—
487
11
—
1,132

0.60 %

0.69 %

0.24 %

0.26 %

0.62

0.71

0.16

0.12

(1)

Residential mortgage loans accruing past due 90 days or more are fully-insured loans. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, residential mortgage included $260 million and $444 million of loans on
which interest had been curtailed by the FHA, and therefore were no longer accruing interest, although principal was still insured, and $108 million and $190 million of loans on which interest was
still accruing.
(2)
Outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $51.8 billion and $48.5 billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $50.4 billion and $51.1 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021, and non-U.S. consumer loans of $3.0 billion as of both period ends.
(3)
For more information on the fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)
Excludes consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, $7 million and $21 million of loans accounted for under the fair value option were past due
90 days or more and not accruing interest.
n/a = not applicable

Table 20 presents net charge-offs and related ratios for consumer loans and leases.

Table 20 Consumer Net Charge-offs and Related Ratios
(Dollars in millions)

Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Other consumer
Total

Net Charge-offs
2021
2022
(28)
$
72 $
(119)
(90)
1,723
1,334
1
18
270
521
1,847
$
1,855 $

Net Charge-off Ratios (1)
2021
2022
(0.01)%
0.03 %
(0.39)
(0.33)
2.29
1.60
—
0.02
n/m
n/m
0.44
0.42

(1)
Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net charge-offs divided by average outstanding loans and leases, excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
n/m = not meaningful

We believe that the presentation of information adjusted to
exclude the impact of the fully-insured loan portfolio and loans
accounted for under the fair value option is more representative
of the ongoing operations and credit quality of the business. As
a result, in the following tables and discussions of the
residential mortgage and home equity portfolios, we exclude
loans accounted for under the fair value option and provide
information that excludes the impact of the fully-insured loan
portfolio in certain credit quality statistics.

Residential Mortgage
The residential mortgage portfolio made up the largest
percentage of our consumer loan portfolio at 50 percent of
consumer loans and leases in 2022. Approximately 51 percent
of the residential mortgage portfolio was in Consumer Banking
and 45 percent was in GWIM. The remaining portion was in All
Other.
Outstanding balances in the residential mortgage portfolio
increased $7.7 billion in 2022 as originations were partially
offset by paydowns and loan sales.

Bank of America 2022 107

At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the residential mortgage
portfolio included $11.7 billion and $12.7 billion of outstanding
fully-insured loans, of which both had $2.2 billion of FHA
insurance, with the remainder protected by Fannie Mae longterm standby agreements.

Table 21 presents certain residential mortgage key credit
statistics on both a reported basis and excluding the fullyinsured loan portfolio. The following discussion presents the
residential mortgage portfolio excluding the fully-insured loan
portfolio.

Table 21 Residential Mortgage – Key Credit Statistics
Reported Basis (1)
2022
229,670
1,471
368
2,167

(Dollars in millions)

Outstandings
Accruing past due 30 days or more
Accruing past due 90 days or more
Nonperforming loans (2)
Percent of portfolio
Refreshed LTV greater than 90 but less than or equal to 100
Refreshed LTV greater than 100
Refreshed FICO below 620
(1)
(2)

$

Excluding Fully-insured Loans (1)
December 31
2021
2021
2022
221,963
$
209,259
$
217,976
1,753
866
844
634
—
—
2,284
2,284
2,167

$

1%
—
2

1%
—
1

1%
—
1

1%
—
1

Outstandings, accruing past due, nonperforming loans and percentages of portfolio exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
Includes loans that are contractually current which primarily consist of collateral-dependent TDRs, including those that have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy and loans that have not yet
demonstrated a sustained period of payment performance following a TDR.

Nonperforming outstanding balances in the residential
mortgage portfolio decreased $117 million in 2022 primarily
due to decreases from consumer real estate loan sales in the
second quarter of 2022, partially offset by increases from loans
whose prior-period deferrals expired and were modified in TDRs
during the first quarter of 2022. Of the nonperforming
residential mortgage loans at December 31, 2022, $1.4 billion,
or 63 percent, were current on contractual payments. Loans
accruing past due 30 days or more decreased $22 million.
Net charge-offs of $72 million for 2022 increased $100
million compared to 2021 primarily due to loan sales that
occurred in the second quarter of 2022.
Of the $218.0 billion in total residential mortgage loans
outstanding at December 31, 2022, 28 percent were originated
as interest-only loans. The outstanding balance of interest-only
residential mortgage loans that had entered the amortization
period was $3.4 billion, or six percent, at December 31, 2022.
Residential mortgage loans that have entered the amortization
period generally experience a higher rate of early stage
delinquencies and nonperforming status compared to the
residential mortgage portfolio as a whole. At December 31,
2022, $64 million, or two percent, of outstanding interest-only

residential mortgages that had entered the amortization period
were accruing past due 30 days or more compared to $844
million, or less than one percent, for the entire residential
mortgage portfolio. In addition, at December 31, 2022, $204
million, or six percent, of outstanding interest-only residential
mortgage loans that had entered the amortization period were
nonperforming, of which $79 million were contractually current.
Loans that have yet to enter the amortization period in our
interest-only residential mortgage portfolio are primarily wellcollateralized loans to our wealth management clients and have
an interest-only period of three to ten years. Approximately 96
percent of these loans that have yet to enter the amortization
period will not be required to make a fully-amortizing payment
until 2025 or later.
Table 22 presents outstandings, nonperforming loans and
net charge-offs by certain state concentrations for the
residential mortgage portfolio. The Los Angeles-Long BeachSanta Ana Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) within California
represented 14 percent and 15 percent of outstandings at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. In the New York area, the New
York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island MSA made up 15 percent
of outstandings at both December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 22 Residential Mortgage State Concentrations
Outstandings (1)

Nonperforming (1)
December 31

(Dollars in millions)

California
New York
Florida
Texas
New Jersey
Other
Residential mortgage loans
Fully-insured loan portfolio
Total residential mortgage loan portfolio
(1)

$

$
$

2022
80,878
26,228
15,225
9,399
8,810
77,436
217,976
11,694
229,670

$

$
$

2021
77,819
24,975
13,883
9,002
8,723
74,857
209,259
12,704
221,963

Net Charge-offs

2022
$

$

656
328
145
88
96
854
2,167

$

$

2021
693
358
158
86
117
872
2,284

2021

2022
$

$

37
7
(2)
—
3
27
72

$

$

(14)
3
(8)
—
—
(9)
(28)

Outstandings and nonperforming loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.

Home Equity
At December 31, 2022, the home equity portfolio made up six
percent of the consumer portfolio and was comprised of home
equity lines of credit (HELOCs), home equity loans and reverse
mortgages. HELOCs generally have an initial draw period of 10

108 Bank of America 2022

years, and after the initial draw period ends, the loans generally
convert to 15- or 20-year amortizing loans. We no longer
originate home equity loans or reverse mortgages.
At December 31, 2022, 82 percent of the home equity
portfolio was in Consumer Banking, nine percent was in All Other
and the remainder of the portfolio was primarily in GWIM.

Outstanding balances in the home equity portfolio decreased
$1.4 billion in 2022 primarily due to paydowns outpacing draws
on existing lines and new originations. Of the total home equity
portfolio at December 31, 2022 and 2021, $11.1 billion and
$12.2 billion, or 42 percent and 44 percent, were in first-lien
positions. At December 31, 2022, outstanding balances in the
home equity portfolio that were in a second-lien or more junior-

lien position and where we also held the first-lien loan totaled
$4.5 billion, or 17 percent of our total home equity portfolio.
Unused HELOCs totaled $42.4 billion and $40.5 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The HELOC utilization rate was
38 percent and 39 percent at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Table 23 presents certain home equity portfolio key credit
statistics.

Table 23 Home Equity – Key Credit Statistics (1)
December 31
2021
2022
$
27,935
26,563
157
96
630
510

(Dollars in millions)

Outstandings
Accruing past due 30 days or more
Nonperforming loans (2)
Percent of portfolio
Refreshed CLTV greater than 90 but less than or equal to 100
Refreshed CLTV greater than 100
Refreshed FICO below 620
(1)
(2)

$

—%
—
2

—%
1
3

Outstandings, accruing past due, nonperforming loans and percentages of the portfolio exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.
Includes loans that are contractually current which primarily consist of collateral-dependent TDRs, including those that have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy, junior-lien loans where the
underlying first lien is 90 days or more past due, as well as loans that have not yet demonstrated a sustained period of payment performance following a TDR.

Nonperforming outstanding balances in the home equity
portfolio decreased $120 million to $510 million at
December 31, 2022, primarily driven by loan sales. Of the
nonperforming home equity loans at December 31, 2022, $275
million, or 54 percent, were current on contractual payments. In
addition, $167 million, or 33 percent, of nonperforming home
equity loans were 180 days or more past due and had been
written down to the estimated fair value of the collateral, less
costs to sell. Accruing loans that were 30 days or more past
due decreased $61 million in 2022.
Net recoveries decreased $29 million to $90 million in 2022
compared to 2021.
Of the $26.6 billion in total home equity portfolio
outstandings at December 31, 2022, as shown in Table 23, 13
percent require interest-only payments. The outstanding balance
of HELOCs that had reached the end of their draw period and
entered the amortization period was $5.2 billion at
December 31, 2022. The HELOCs that have entered the
amortization period have experienced a higher percentage of
early stage delinquencies and nonperforming status when
compared to the HELOC portfolio as a whole. At December 31,
2022, $53 million, or one percent, of outstanding HELOCs that

Table 24

had entered the amortization period were accruing past due 30
days or more. In addition, at December 31, 2022, $354 million,
or seven percent, were nonperforming.
For our interest-only HELOC portfolio, we do not actively track
how many of our home equity customers pay only the minimum
amount due on their home equity loans and lines; however, we
can infer some of this information through a review of our
HELOC portfolio that we service and is still in its revolving
period. During 2022, 10 percent of these customers with an
outstanding balance did not pay any principal on their HELOCs.
Table 24 presents outstandings, nonperforming balances and
net recoveries by certain state concentrations for the home
equity portfolio. In the New York area, the New York-Northern
New Jersey-Long Island MSA made up 12 percent and 13
percent of the outstanding home equity portfolio at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The Los Angeles-Long BeachSanta Ana MSA within California made up 11 percent and 10
percent of the outstanding home equity portfolio at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Home Equity State Concentrations
Outstandings (1)

(Dollars in millions)

California
Florida
New Jersey
New York
Massachusetts
Other
Total home equity loan portfolio
(1)

$

$

2022
7,406
2,743
2,047
1,806
1,347
11,214
26,563

$

$

Nonperforming (1)
December 31
2021
2021
2022
7,600 $
140
119 $
2,977
78
63
2,259
69
53
2,072
96
80
1,422
32
23
11,605
215
172
27,935 $
630
510 $

$

$

Net Charge-offs
2021
2022
(40)
(20) $
(21)
(21)
(4)
(3)
(1)
(4)
(3)
(2)
(50)
(40)
(119)
(90) $

Outstandings and nonperforming loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.

Credit Card
At December 31, 2022, 97 percent of the credit card portfolio
was managed in Consumer Banking with the remainder in GWIM.
Outstandings in the credit card portfolio increased $12.0 billion
during 2022 to $93.4 billion primarily driven by increased
purchase volumes, partially offset by the sale of a $1.6 billion
affinity card loan portfolio. Net charge-offs decreased $389

million to $1.3 billion in 2022 compared to 2021, as loss
rates remained near historic lows. In addition, the prior year
included charge-offs associated with deferrals that expired in
2020. Credit card loans 30 days or more past due and still
accruing interest increased $508 million, and 90 days or more
past due and still accruing interest increased $230 million.
Unused lines of credit for credit card increased to $370.1 billion

Bank of America 2022 109

at December 31, 2022 from $361.2 billion at December 31,
2021.

Table 25 presents certain state concentrations for the credit
card portfolio.

Table 25 Credit Card State Concentrations
Accruing Past Due
90 Days or More

Outstandings
2022
15,363
9,512
8,125
5,381
4,844
50,196
93,421

(Dollars in millions)

California
Florida
Texas
New York
Washington
Other
Total credit card portfolio

$

$

Direct/Indirect Consumer
At December 31, 2022, 49 percent of the direct/indirect
portfolio was included in Consumer Banking (consumer auto and
recreational vehicle lending) and 51 percent was included in
GWIM (principally securities-based lending loans). Outstandings

December 31
2021
2022
13,076 $
126
8,046
100
6,894
72
4,725
56
4,080
21
44,617
342
81,438 $
717

$

$

2021
$

82
71
47
35
13
239
487

$

$

$

Net Charge-offs
2021
2022
322
232 $
245
183
158
123
135
99
39
36
824
661
1,723
1,334 $

in the direct/indirect portfolio increased $2.7 billion in 2022 to
$106.2 billion driven by growth in our auto portfolio.
Table 26 presents certain state concentrations for the
direct/indirect consumer loan portfolio.

Table 26 Direct/Indirect State Concentrations
Outstandings
(Dollars in millions)

California
Florida
Texas
New York
New Jersey
Other
Total direct/indirect loan portfolio

$

$

2022
15,516
13,783
9,837
7,891
4,456
54,753
106,236

$

$

Accruing Past Due
90 Days or More

December 31
2021
2022
15,061 $
13,352
9,505
7,802
4,228
53,612
103,560 $

2021
1
—
—
—
—
1
2

$

$

2
1
2
1
—
5
11

Net Charge-offs
2021
2022
$
6 $
4
3
2
1
2
$
18 $

3
1
2
3
(3)
(5)
1

Other Consumer
Other consumer primarily consists of deposit overdraft
balances. Net charge-offs increased $251 million in 2022 to
$521 million, primarily driven by overdraft losses due to higher
payment activity related to checking accounts.

Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed
Properties Activity
Table 27 presents nonperforming consumer loans, leases and
foreclosed properties activity during 2022 and 2021. During
2022, nonperforming consumer loans decreased $235 million
to $2.8 billion primarily due to decreases from loan sales,
partially offset by increases from loans whose prior-period
deferrals expired and were modified in TDRs during the first
quarter of 2022.

110 Bank of America 2022

At December 31, 2022, $605 million, or 22 percent, of
nonperforming loans were 180 days or more past due and had
been written down to their estimated property value less costs
to sell. In addition, at December 31, 2022, $1.7 billion, or 61
percent, of nonperforming consumer loans were modified and
are now current after successful trial periods, or are current
loans classified as nonperforming loans in accordance with
applicable policies.
Foreclosed properties increased $20 million in 2022 to
$121 million. Nonperforming loans also include certain loans
that have been modified in TDRs where economic concessions
have been granted to borrowers experiencing financial
difficulties.

Table 27 Nonperforming Consumer Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity
(Dollars in millions)

Nonperforming loans and leases, January 1
Additions
Reductions:
Paydowns and payoffs
Sales
Returns to performing status (1)
Charge-offs
Transfers to foreclosed properties
Total net additions/(reductions) to nonperforming loans and leases
Total nonperforming loans and leases, December 31
Foreclosed properties, December 31 (2)
Nonperforming consumer loans, leases and foreclosed properties, December 31
Nonperforming consumer loans and leases as a percentage of outstanding consumer loans and leases (3)
Nonperforming consumer loans, leases and foreclosed properties as a percentage of outstanding consumer loans, leases and
foreclosed properties (3)
(1)

(2)
(3)

$

$

2022
2,989
1,453
(535)
(402)
(661)
(56)
(34)
(235)
2,754
121
2,875
0.60 %
0.63

$

$

2021
2,725
2,006
(625)
(4)
(1,037)
(64)
(12)
264
2,989
101
3,090
0.69 %
0.71

Consumer loans may be returned to performing status when all principal and interest is current and full repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest is expected, or when the loan
otherwise becomes well-secured and is in the process of collection.
Foreclosed property balances do not include properties insured by certain government-guaranteed loans, principally FHA-insured, of $60 million and $52 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Outstanding consumer loans and leases exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.

Table 28 presents TDRs for the consumer real estate portfolio. Performing TDR balances are excluded from nonperforming loans
and leases in Table 27.

Table 28 Consumer Real Estate Troubled Debt Restructurings
(Dollars in millions)

Residential mortgage (1, 2)
Home equity (3)
Total consumer real estate troubled debt restructurings
(1)

(2)
(3)

Nonperforming
$
1,726
324
$
2,050

December 31, 2022
Performing
$
1,548 $
544
$
2,092 $

Total
3,274
868
4,142

Nonperforming
$
1,498
254
$
1,752

December 31, 2021
Performing
$
2,278 $
652
$
2,930 $

Total
3,776
906
4,682

At December 31, 2022 and 2021, residential mortgage TDRs deemed collateral dependent totaled $1.8 billion and $1.6 billion, and included $1.6 billion and $1.4 billion of loans classified as
nonperforming and $183 million and $279 million of loans classified as performing.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, residential mortgage performing TDRs included $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion of loans that were fully-insured.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, home equity TDRs deemed collateral dependent totaled $411 million and $370 million, and included $293 million and $222 million of loans classified as
nonperforming and $118 million and $148 million of loans classified as performing.

In addition to modifying consumer real estate loans, we work
with customers who are experiencing financial difficulty by
modifying credit card and other consumer loans. Credit card and
other consumer loan modifications generally involve a reduction
in the customer’s interest rate on the account and placing the
customer on a fixed payment plan not exceeding 60 months.
Modifications of credit card and other consumer loans are
made through programs utilizing direct customer contact, but
may also utilize external programs. At December 31, 2022 and
2021, our credit card and other consumer TDR portfolio was
$624 million and $672 million, of which $540 million and $599
million were current or less than 30 days past due under the
modified terms.

to measure and evaluate concentrations within portfolios. In
addition, risk ratings are a factor in determining the level of
allocated capital and the allowance for credit losses.
As part of our ongoing risk mitigation initiatives, we attempt
to work with clients experiencing financial difficulty to modify
their loans to terms that better align with their current ability to
pay. In situations where an economic concession has been
granted to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty, we identify
these loans as TDRs. For more information on our accounting
policies regarding delinquencies, nonperforming status and net
charge-offs for the commercial portfolio, see Note 1 – Summary
of Significant Accounting Principles to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management

Management of Commercial Credit Risk
Concentrations

Credit risk management for the commercial portfolio begins with
an assessment of the credit risk profile of the borrower or
counterparty based on an analysis of its financial position. As
part of the overall credit risk assessment, our commercial credit
exposures are assigned a risk rating and are subject to approval
based on defined credit approval standards. Subsequent to loan
origination, risk ratings are monitored on an ongoing basis, and
if necessary, adjusted to reflect changes in the financial
condition, cash flow, risk profile or outlook of a borrower or
counterparty. In making credit decisions, we consider risk rating,
collateral, country, industry and single-name concentration limits
while also balancing these considerations with the total
borrower or counterparty relationship. We use a variety of tools
to continuously monitor the ability of a borrower or counterparty
to perform under its obligations. We use risk rating aggregations

Commercial credit risk is evaluated and managed with the goal
that concentrations of credit exposure continue to be aligned
with our risk appetite. We review, measure and manage
concentrations of credit exposure by industry, product,
geography, customer relationship and loan size. We also review,
measure and manage commercial real estate loans by
geographic location and property type. In addition, within our
non-U.S. portfolio, we evaluate exposures by region and by
country. Tables 33, 36 and 39 summarize our concentrations.
We also utilize syndications of exposure to third parties, loan
sales, hedging and other risk mitigation techniques to manage
the size and risk profile of the commercial credit portfolio. For
more information on our industry concentrations, see Table 36

Bank of America 2022 111

and Commercial Portfolio Credit Risk Management – Industry
Concentrations on page 115.
We account for certain large corporate loans and loan
commitments, including issued but unfunded letters of credit
which are considered utilized for credit risk management
purposes, that exceed our single-name credit risk concentration
guidelines under the fair value option. Lending commitments,
both funded and unfunded, are actively managed and
monitored, and as appropriate, credit risk for these lending
relationships may be mitigated through the use of credit
derivatives, with our credit view and market perspectives
determining the size and timing of the hedging activity. In
addition, we purchase credit protection to cover the funded
portion as well as the unfunded portion of certain other credit
exposures. To lessen the cost of obtaining our desired credit
protection levels, credit exposure may be added within an
industry, borrower or counterparty group by selling protection.
These credit derivatives do not meet the requirements for
treatment as accounting hedges. They are carried at fair value
with changes in fair value recorded in other income.
In addition, we are a member of various securities and
derivative exchanges and clearinghouses, both in the U.S. and
other countries. As a member, we may be required to pay a prorata share of the losses incurred by some of these
organizations as a result of another member default and under
other loss scenarios. For more information, see Note 12 –
Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

commercial loans and leases increased $45.9 billion during
2022 due to growth in commercial and industrial, primarily in
Global Banking. This increase was partially offset by lower U.S.
small business commercial loans due to repayments of PPP
loans by the Small Business Administration (SBA) under the
terms of the program.
Credit quality of commercial real estate borrowers generally
improved from 2021 as pandemic-impacted sectors are
recovering. However, many commercial real estate markets,
while improving, are still experiencing disruptions in demand,
supply chain challenges, tenant difficulties and challenging
capital markets. Demand for office space continues to be
uncertain as companies evaluate space needs with employment
models that utilize a mix of remote and conventional office use.
The commercial allowance for loan and lease losses
remained relatively unchanged at $5.4 billion at December 31,
2022, as loan growth and a dampened macroeconomic outlook
were offset by asset quality improvement and a reserve release
for reduced pandemic uncertainties. For more information, see
Allowance for Credit Losses on page 120.
Total commercial utilized credit exposure increased $51.3
billion during 2022 to $704.9 billion primarily driven by higher
loans and leases and derivative assets. The utilization rate for
loans and leases, standby letters of credit (SBLCs) and financial
guarantees, and commercial letters of credit, in the aggregate,
was 56 percent at both December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Table 29 presents commercial credit exposure by type for
utilized, unfunded and total binding committed credit exposure.
Commercial utilized credit exposure includes SBLCs and
financial guarantees and commercial letters of credit that have
been issued and for which we are legally bound to advance
funds under prescribed conditions during a specified time
period, and excludes exposure related to trading account
assets. Although funds have not yet been advanced, these
exposure types are considered utilized for credit risk
management purposes.

Commercial Credit Portfolio
During 2022, commercial credit quality improved as charge-offs,
nonperforming commercial loans and reservable criticized
utilized exposure declined. Due to the ongoing Russia/Ukraine
conflict, all direct exposure to Russian counterparties was
downgraded and reported as reservable criticized exposure, and
expected credit losses (ECL) have been incorporated into our
estimate of the allowance for credit losses. Outstanding

Table 29 Commercial Credit Exposure by Type
Commercial Utilized (1)
(Dollars in millions)

Loans and leases
Derivative assets (5)
Standby letters of credit and financial guarantees
Debt securities and other investments
Loans held-for-sale
Operating leases
Commercial letters of credit
Other
Total
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

$

$

2022
589,362
48,642
33,376
20,195
6,112
5,509
973
698
704,867

$

$

2021
543,420
35,344
34,389
19,427
13,185
5,935
1,176
652
653,528

Commercial Unfunded (2, 3, 4)
December 31
2021
2022
454,256
$
487,772 $
—
—
639
1,266
4,638
2,551
16,581
3,729
—
—
247
28
—
—
476,361
$
495,346 $

Total Commercial Committed

$

$

2022
1,077,134
48,642
34,642
22,746
9,841
5,509
1,001
698
1,200,213

$

$

2021
997,676
35,344
35,028
24,065
29,766
5,935
1,423
652
1,129,889

Commercial utilized exposure includes loans of $5.4 billion and $7.2 billion accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Commercial unfunded exposure includes commitments accounted for under the fair value option with a notional amount of $3.0 billion and $4.8 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Excludes unused business card lines, which are not legally binding.
Includes the notional amount of unfunded legally binding lending commitments, net of amounts distributed (i.e., syndicated or participated) to other financial institutions. The distributed amounts
were $10.4 billion and $10.7 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Derivative assets are carried at fair value, reflect the effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements and have been reduced by cash collateral of $33.8 billion and $30.8 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. Not reflected in utilized and committed exposure is additional non-cash derivative collateral held of $51.6 billion and $44.8 billion at December 31, 2022 and
2021, which consists primarily of other marketable securities.

112 Bank of America 2022

Nonperforming commercial loans decreased $524 million across all product types. Table 30 presents our commercial loans and
leases portfolio and related credit quality information at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 30 Commercial Credit Quality
Outstandings

Commercial and industrial:
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Total commercial and industrial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial (1)
Commercial loans excluding loans accounted for under the fair
value option
Loans accounted for under the fair value option (2)
Total commercial loans and leases
(1)
(2)

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

Accruing Past Due
90 Days or More

Nonperforming
December 31
2021
2022

2021

2022

$

358,481
124,479
482,960
69,766
13,644
566,370
17,560

$

325,936
113,266
439,202
63,009
14,825
517,036
19,183

$

553
212
765
271
4
1,040
14

$

825
268
1,093
382
80
1,555
23

$

190
25
215
46
8
269
355

$

171
19
190
40
8
238
87

$

583,930
5,432
589,362

$

536,219
7,201
543,420

$

1,054

$

1,578

$

624

$

325

$

$

Includes card-related products.
Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value option includes U.S. commercial of $2.9 billion and $4.6 billion and non-U.S. commercial of $2.5 billion and $2.6 billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021. For more information on the fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Table 31 presents net charge-offs and related ratios for our commercial loans and leases for 2022 and 2021.

Table 31 Commercial Net Charge-offs and Related Ratios
(Dollars in millions)

Commercial and industrial:
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial

$

U.S. small business commercial
Total commercial

$

71
21

Total commercial and industrial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing

(1)

Net Charge-off Ratios (1)
2021
2022

Net Charge-offs
2021
2022

92
66
5
163
154
317

$

$

(23)
35
12
34
(1)
45
351
396

0.02 %
0.02

(0.01%)
0.04

0.02
0.10
0.03
0.03
0.86
0.06

—
0.06
—
0.01
1.19
0.08

Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net charge-offs divided by average outstanding loans and leases, excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.

Table 32 presents commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure by loan type. Criticized exposure corresponds to the Special
Mention, Substandard and Doubtful asset categories as defined by regulatory authorities. Total commercial reservable criticized
utilized exposure decreased $3.1 billion during 2022, which was broad-based across industries. At December 31, 2022 and 2021,
88 percent and 87 percent of commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure was secured.

Table 32 Commercial Reservable Criticized Utilized Exposure (1, 2)
December 31
Commercial and industrial:
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Total commercial and industrial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial
Total commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure
(1)

(2)

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

10,724
2,665
13,389
5,201
240
18,830
444
19,274

2.78 %
2.04
2.59
7.30
1.76
3.13
2.53
3.12

$

$

11,327
2,582
13,909
7,572
387
21,868
513
22,381

3.20%
2.17
2.94
11.72
2.61
3.96
2.67
3.91

Total commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure includes loans and leases of $18.5 billion and $21.2 billion and commercial letters of credit of $817 million and $1.2 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Percentages are calculated as commercial reservable criticized utilized exposure divided by total commercial reservable utilized exposure for each exposure category.

Commercial and Industrial
Commercial and industrial loans include U.S. commercial and
non-U.S. commercial portfolios.
U.S. Commercial
At December 31, 2022, 63 percent of the U.S. commercial loan

portfolio, excluding small business, was managed in Global
Banking, 21 percent in Global Markets, 15 percent in GWIM
(loans that provide financing for asset purchases, business
investments and other liquidity needs for high net worth clients)
and the remainder primarily in Consumer Banking. U.S.
commercial loans increased $32.5 billion, or 10 percent, during

Bank of America 2022 113

2022 primarily driven by Global Banking. Reservable criticized
utilized exposure decreased $603 million, or five percent, driven
by decreases across a broad range of industries.
Non-U.S. Commercial
At December 31, 2022, 64 percent of the non-U.S. commercial
loan portfolio was managed in Global Banking, 35 percent in
Global Markets and the remainder in GWIM. Non-U.S.
commercial loans increased $11.2 billion, or 10 percent, during
2022 due to loan growth in Global Markets. Reservable criticized
utilized exposure increased $83 million, or three percent, due to
downgrades for direct exposure to Russian counterparties. For
information on the non-U.S. commercial portfolio, see Non-U.S.
Portfolio on page 117. For more information on the Russia/
Ukraine conflict, see Recent Developments on page 74.

Commercial Real Estate
Commercial real estate primarily includes commercial loans
secured by non-owner-occupied real estate and is dependent on
the sale or lease of the real estate as the primary source of
repayment. Outstanding loans increased $6.8 billion, or 11
percent, during 2022 to $69.8 billion due to new originations
outpacing paydowns and increased utilizations under existing

credit facilities. Reservable criticized utilized exposure
decreased $2.4 billion, or 31 percent, primarily driven by Hotels
due to improving vacancy rates and reduced travel restrictions.
The portfolio remains diversified across property types and
geographic regions. California represented the largest state
concentration at 19 percent and 21 percent of the commercial
real estate portfolio at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The
commercial real estate portfolio is predominantly managed in
Global Banking and consists of loans made primarily to public
and private developers, and commercial real estate firms.
During 2022, we continued to see low default rates and
varying degrees of improvement in certain geographic regions
and property types of the portfolio. We use a number of
proactive risk mitigation initiatives to reduce adversely rated
exposure in the commercial real estate portfolio, including
transfers of deteriorating exposures for management by
independent special asset officers and the pursuit of loan
restructurings or asset sales to achieve the best results for our
customers and the Corporation.
Table 33 presents outstanding commercial real estate loans
by geographic region, based on the geographic location of the
collateral, and by property type.

Table 33 Outstanding Commercial Real Estate Loans
December 31
2021
2022

(Dollars in millions)

By Geographic Region
Northeast
California
Southwest
Southeast
Florida
Midwest
Illinois
Midsouth
Northwest
Non-U.S.
Other
Total outstanding commercial real estate loans
By Property Type
Non-residential
Office
Industrial / Warehouse
Multi-family rental
Shopping centers /Retail
Hotel / Motels
Unsecured
Multi-use
Other
Total non-residential
Residential
Total outstanding commercial real estate loans

U.S. Small Business Commercial
The U.S. small business commercial loan portfolio is comprised
of small business card loans and small business loans primarily
managed in Consumer Banking, and included $1.0 billion and
$4.7 billion of PPP loans outstanding at December 31, 2022
and 2021. The decline of $3.7 billion in PPP loans during 2022
was primarily due to repayment of the loans by the SBA under

114 Bank of America 2022

$

$

$

$

15,601
13,360
8,723
7,713
5,374
3,419
3,327
2,716
1,959
5,518
2,056
69,766

18,230
13,775
10,412
5,830
5,696
3,195
2,403
9,046
68,587
1,179
69,766

$

$

$

$

14,318
13,145
7,510
6,758
4,367
3,221
2,878
2,289
1,709
4,760
2,054
63,009

18,309
10,749
8,173
6,502
5,932
3,178
1,835
7,238
61,916
1,093
63,009

the terms of the program. Excluding PPP, credit card-related
products were 53 percent and 50 percent of the U.S. small
business commercial portfolio at December 31, 2022 and 2021
and represented all of the net charge-offs in 2022 compared to
95 percent in 2021. The increase of $268 million in accruing
past due 90 days or more in 2022 was driven by PPP loans,
which are fully guaranteed by the SBA.

Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed
Properties Activity
Table 34 presents the nonperforming commercial loans, leases
and foreclosed properties activity during 2022 and 2021.
Nonperforming loans do not include loans accounted for under
the fair value option. During 2022, nonperforming commercial
loans and leases decreased $524 million to $1.1 billion. At

December 31, 2022, 97 percent of commercial nonperforming
loans, leases and foreclosed properties were secured, and 65
percent were contractually current. Commercial nonperforming
loans were carried at 85 percent of their unpaid principal
balance, as the carrying value of these loans has been reduced
to the estimated collateral value less costs to sell.

Table 34 Nonperforming Commercial Loans, Leases and Foreclosed Properties Activity (1, 2)
(Dollars in millions)

Nonperforming loans and leases, January 1
Additions
Reductions:
Paydowns
Sales
Returns to performing status (3)
Charge-offs
Transfers to loans held-for-sale
Total net reductions to nonperforming loans and leases
Total nonperforming loans and leases, December 31
Foreclosed properties, December 31
Nonperforming commercial loans, leases and foreclosed properties, December 31
Nonperforming commercial loans and leases as a percentage of outstanding commercial loans and leases (4)
Nonperforming commercial loans, leases and foreclosed properties as a percentage of outstanding commercial loans, leases
and foreclosed properties (4)
(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)

$

2022
1,578
952
(825)
(57)
(334)
(221)
(39)
(524)
1,054
49
1,103
0.18 %

$

2021
2,227
1,622

$

(1,163)
(199)
(264)
(254)
(391)
(649)
1,578
29
1,607
0.29 %

$

0.30

0.19

Balances do not include nonperforming loans held-for-sale of $219 million and $264 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Includes U.S. small business commercial activity. Small business card loans are excluded as they are not classified as nonperforming.
Commercial loans and leases may be returned to performing status when all principal and interest is current and full repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest is expected, or
when the loan otherwise becomes well-secured and is in the process of collection. TDRs are generally classified as performing after a sustained period of demonstrated payment performance.
Outstanding commercial loans exclude loans accounted for under the fair value option.

Table 35 presents our commercial TDRs by product type and
performing status. U.S. small business commercial TDRs are
comprised of renegotiated small business card loans and small
business loans. The renegotiated small business card loans are
not classified as nonperforming as they are charged off no later

than the end of the month in which the loan becomes 180 days
past due. Commercial TDRs increased $957 million, or 50
percent, during 2022 primarily due to commercial real estate
loans that were modified as TDRs during the first half of the
year.

Table 35 Commercial Troubled Debt Restructurings
(Dollars in millions)

Commercial and industrial:
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Total commercial and industrial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial
Total commercial troubled debt restructurings

Nonperforming
$

$

305
69
374
59
3
436
—
436

December 31, 2022
Performing
$

$

Industry Concentrations
Table 36 presents commercial committed and utilized credit
exposure by industry. Our commercial credit exposure is
diversified across a broad range of industries. Total commercial
committed exposure increased $70.3 billion, or six percent,
during 2022 to $1.2 trillion. The increase in commercial
committed exposure was concentrated in Asset managers and
funds, Global commercial banks and Pharmaceuticals and
biotechnology.
Industry limits are used internally to manage industry
concentrations and are based on committed exposure that is
determined on an industry-by-industry basis. A risk management
framework is in place to set and approve industry limits as well
as to provide ongoing monitoring.
Asset managers and funds, our largest industry
concentration with committed exposure of $165.1 billion,

985
238
1,223
1,131
16
2,370
51
2,421

Total
$

$

1,290
307
1,597
1,190
19
2,806
51
2,857

Nonperforming
$

$

359
72
431
244
50
725
—
725

December 31, 2021
Performing
$

$

685
8
693
437
7
1,137
38
1,175

Total
$

$

1,044
80
1,124
681
57
1,862
38
1,900

increased $28.2 billion, or 21 percent, during 2022 primarily
driven by investment-grade exposures.
Real estate, our second largest industry concentration with
committed exposure of $99.7 billion, increased $3.5 billion, or
four percent, during 2022. For more information on the
commercial real estate and related portfolios, see Commercial
Portfolio Credit Risk Management – Commercial Real Estate on
page 114.
Capital goods, our third largest industry concentration with
committed exposure of $87.3 billion, increased $3.0 billion, or
four percent, during 2022. The increase in committed exposure
occurred primarily as a result of increases in the Electrical
equipment and Trading companies and distributors, partially
offset by a decrease in Building products.
While the U.S. and global economies have shown signs of
relief from the pandemic, uncertainty remains as a result of

Bank of America 2022 115

geopolitical and inflationary pressures, and a number of
industries will likely continue to be adversely impacted due to
these conditions. We continue to monitor all industries,

particularly higher risk industries that are experiencing or could
experience a more significant impact to their financial condition.

Table 36 Commercial Credit Exposure by Industry (1)
Commercial
Utilized
(Dollars in millions)

Asset managers & funds
Real estate (3)
Capital goods
Finance companies
Healthcare equipment and services
Materials
Retailing
Government & public education
Food, beverage and tobacco
Consumer services
Individuals and trusts
Commercial services and supplies
Utilities
Energy
Transportation
Technology hardware and equipment
Global commercial banks
Media
Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology
Software and services
Consumer durables and apparel
Vehicle dealers
Insurance
Telecommunication services
Automobiles and components
Food and staples retailing
Financial markets infrastructure (clearinghouses)
Religious and social organizations
Total commercial credit exposure by industry
(1)
(2)

(3)

$

$

2022
106,842
72,180
45,580
55,248
33,554
26,304
24,785
34,861
23,232
26,980
34,897
23,628
20,292
15,132
22,273
11,441
27,217
14,781
7,547
12,961
10,009
12,909
10,224
9,679
8,774
7,157
3,913
2,467
704,867

$

$

Total Commercial
Committed (2)
December 31
2021
2022
89,786 $
165,087
69,384
99,722
42,784
87,314
59,327
79,546
32,003
58,761
25,133
55,589
24,514
53,714
37,597
48,134
21,584
47,486
28,172
47,372
29,752
45,572
22,390
41,596
17,082
40,164
14,217
36,043
21,079
33,858
10,159
29,825
20,062
29,293
12,495
28,216
5,608
26,208
10,663
25,633
9,740
21,389
11,030
20,638
5,743
19,444
10,056
17,349
9,236
16,911
6,902
11,908
3,876
8,752
3,154
4,689
653,528 $
1,200,213

$

$

2021
136,914
96,202
84,293
86,009
58,195
53,652
50,816
50,066
45,419
48,052
39,869
42,451
36,855
34,136
32,015
26,910
21,390
26,318
19,439
27,643
21,226
15,678
14,323
21,270
17,052
12,226
6,076
5,394
1,129,889

Includes U.S. small business commercial exposure.
Includes the notional amount of unfunded legally binding lending commitments, net of amounts distributed (i.e., syndicated or participated) to other financial institutions. The distributed amounts
were $10.4 billion and $10.7 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Industries are viewed from a variety of perspectives to best isolate the perceived risks. For purposes of this table, the real estate industry is defined based on the primary business activity of the
borrowers or counterparties using operating cash flows and primary source of repayment as key factors.

Risk Mitigation
We purchase credit protection to cover the funded portion as
well as the unfunded portion of certain credit exposures. To
lower the cost of obtaining our desired credit protection levels,
we may add credit exposure within an industry, borrower or
counterparty group by selling protection.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, net notional credit default
protection purchased in our credit derivatives portfolio to hedge
our funded and unfunded exposures for which we elected the
fair value option, as well as certain other credit exposures, was
$9.0 billion and $2.6 billion. We recorded net losses of $37
million in 2022 compared to net losses $91 million in 2021.
The gains and losses on these instruments were largely offset
by gains and losses on the related exposures. The Value-at-Risk
(VaR) results for these exposures are included in the fair value
option portfolio information in Table 43. For more information,
see Trading Risk Management on page 123.

116 Bank of America 2022

Tables 37 and 38 present the maturity profiles and the
credit exposure debt ratings of the net credit default protection
portfolio at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 37 Net Credit Default Protection by Maturity

Less than or equal to one year
Greater than one year and less than or equal
to five years
Greater than five years
Total net credit default protection

December 31
2021
2022
34 %
14 %
85
1
100 %

62
4
100 %

trades. For more information on credit derivatives and
counterparty credit risk valuation adjustments, see Note 3 –
Derivatives to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Table 38 Net Credit Default Protection by Credit
Exposure Debt Rating
Net
Percent of
Percent of
Notional (1)
Total
Total
December 31
2021
2022

Net
Notional (1)
(Dollars in millions)

Ratings (2, 3)
AAA
AA
A
BBB
BB
B
CCC and below
NR (4)
Total net credit
default protection
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

$

(379)
(867)
(3,257)
(2,476)
(1,049)
(676)
(93)
(182)

4.0 %
10.0
36.0
28.0
12.0
7.0
1.0
2.0

$

—
—
(350)
(710)
(809)
(659)
(35)
(55)

—%
—
13.4
27.1
30.9
25.2
1.3
2.1

$

(8,979)

100.0 %

$

(2,618)

100.0 %

Represents net credit default protection purchased.
Ratings are refreshed on a quarterly basis.
Ratings of BBB- or higher are considered to meet the definition of investment grade.
NR is comprised of index positions held and any names that have not been rated.

In addition to our net notional credit default protection
purchased to cover the funded and unfunded portion of certain
credit exposures, credit derivatives are used for market-making
activities for clients and establishing positions intended to profit
from directional or relative value changes. We execute the
majority of our credit derivative trades in the OTC market with
large, multinational financial institutions, including brokerdealers and, to a lesser degree, with a variety of other
investors. Because these transactions are executed in the OTC
market, we are subject to settlement risk. We are also subject
to credit risk in the event that these counterparties fail to
perform under the terms of these contracts. In order to properly
reflect counterparty credit risk, we record counterparty credit risk
valuation adjustments on certain derivative assets, including our
purchased credit default protection. In most cases, credit
derivative transactions are executed on a daily margin basis.
Therefore, events such as a credit downgrade, depending on the
ultimate rating level, or a breach of credit covenants would
typically require an increase in the amount of collateral required
by the counterparty, where applicable, and/or allow us to take
additional protective measures such as early termination of all

Non-U.S. Portfolio
Our non-U.S. credit and trading portfolios are subject to country
risk. We define country risk as the risk of loss from unfavorable
economic and political conditions, currency fluctuations, social
instability and changes in government policies. A risk
management framework is in place to measure, monitor and
manage non-U.S. risk and exposures. In addition to the direct
risk of doing business in a country, we also are exposed to
indirect country risks (e.g., related to the collateral received on
secured financing transactions or related to client clearing
activities). These indirect exposures are managed in the normal
course of business through credit, market and operational risk
governance rather than through country risk governance.
Table 39 presents our 20 largest non-U.S. country exposures
at December 31, 2022. These exposures accounted for 89
percent of our total non-U.S. exposure at both December 31,
2022 and 2021. Net country exposure for these 20 countries
increased $24.0 billion in 2022 primarily driven by increases in
Germany, Japan, Ireland, India and Switzerland, partially offset
by decreases in China, Belgium, Australia and Singapore.
Non-U.S. exposure is presented on an internal risk
management basis and includes sovereign and non-sovereign
credit exposure, securities and other investments issued by or
domiciled in countries other than the U.S.
Funded loans and loan equivalents include loans, leases,
and other extensions of credit and funds, including letters of
credit and due from placements. Unfunded commitments are
the undrawn portion of legally binding commitments related to
loans and loan equivalents. Net counterparty exposure includes
the fair value of derivatives, including the counterparty risk
associated with credit default swaps (CDS), and secured
financing transactions. Securities and other investments are
carried at fair value and long securities exposures are netted
against short exposures with the same underlying issuer to, but
not below, zero. Net country exposure represents country
exposure less hedges and credit default protection purchased,
net of credit default protection sold.

Bank of America 2022 117

Table 39 Top 20 Non-U.S. Countries Exposure

(Dollars in millions)

United Kingdom
Germany
France
Canada
Japan
Australia
Brazil
China
India
Switzerland
Singapore
Netherlands
South Korea
Ireland
Mexico
Hong Kong
Spain
Italy
Saudi Arabia
Belgium
Total top 20 non-U.S.
countries exposure

Funded Loans
and Loan
Equivalents
$
29,965
32,248
13,888
10,992
19,239
14,412
6,175
6,489
6,805
7,039
4,017
3,169
6,103
7,678
4,444
5,123
2,433
3,883
2,428
1,433

Unfunded
Loan
Commitments
$
16,601
9,431
8,064
10,094
1,806
4,013
1,413
294
589
3,063
627
4,892
927
1,157
1,753
523
2,170
1,777
1,465
1,489

Net
Counterparty
Exposure
$
7,243
2,190
2,023
1,472
1,366
568
741
1,378
614
469
126
617
504
151
514
466
398
184
219
184

Securities/
Other
Investments
$
2,570
2,742
3,604
3,383
1,502
1,510
4,199
2,932
2,841
438
4,874
1,402
1,664
230
743
1,181
1,067
426
15
910

Country
Exposure at
December 31
2022
$
56,379
46,611
27,579
25,941
23,913
20,503
12,528
11,093
10,849
11,009
9,644
10,080
9,198
9,216
7,454
7,293
6,068
6,270
4,127
4,016

$

$

$

$

$

187,963

72,148

21,427

Our largest non-U.S. country exposure at December 31,
2022 was the United Kingdom with net exposure of $55.3
billion, which represents an increase of $376 million from
December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by net
counterparty exposure with financial institutions, partially offset
by a reduction in deposits with the central bank. Our second
largest non-U.S. country exposure was Germany with net
exposure of $45.7 billion at December 31, 2022, an increase of
$11.9 billion from December 31, 2021. The increase was driven
by higher deposits with the central bank and increased exposure
with financial institutions and corporates.

118 Bank of America 2022

38,233

319,771

Hedges and
Credit Default
Protection
$
(1,034)
(885)
(986)
(368)
(826)
(286)
(28)
(285)
(80)
(321)
(37)
(797)
(72)
(126)
(62)
(22)
(227)
(602)
(109)
(153)

Net Country
Exposure at
December 31
2022
$
55,345
45,726
26,593
25,573
23,087
20,217
12,500
10,808
10,769
10,688
9,607
9,283
9,126
9,090
7,392
7,271
5,841
5,668
4,018
3,863

Increase
(Decrease)
from
December 31
2021
$
376
11,901
1,686
(738)
5,825
(1,087)
(250)
(1,774)
2,138
2,113
(1,058)
(313)
974
3,551
930
(56)
(79)
464
545
(1,168)

$

$

$

(7,306)

312,465

23,980

Loan and Lease Contractual Maturities
Table 40 disaggregates total outstanding loans and leases by
remaining scheduled principal due dates and interest rates. The
amounts provided do not reflect prepayment assumptions or
hedging activities related to the loan portfolio. For information
on the asset sensitivity of our total banking book balance sheet,
see Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking Book on
page 126.

Table 40 Loan and Lease Contractual Maturities (1)
December 31, 2022
(Dollars in millions)

Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Other consumer
Total consumer loans
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial
Total commercial loans
Total loans and leases

Due in One
Year or Less
$
5,660
251
93,421
65,877
156
165,365
97,153
49,662
19,199
2,737
10,615
179,366
$
344,731

Due After One
Year Through
Five Years
$
32,546
1,195
—
35,066
—
68,807
242,313
52,826
48,051
8,214
4,474
355,878
$
424,685

Amount due in one year or less at:
(Dollars in millions)

Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Other consumer
Total consumer loans
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial
Total commercial loans
Total loans and leases
(1)

Variable Interest
Rates
$
1,007
203
88,113
47,240
—
136,563
73,593
42,692
18,361
229
6,363
141,238
$
277,801

Fixed Interest
Rates
$
4,653
48
5,308
18,637
156
28,802
23,560
6,970
838
2,508
4,252
38,128
$
66,930

Due After Five
Years Through
15 Years
$
94,544
5,076
—
4,464
—
104,084
20,343
22,436
1,650
1,026
2,407
47,862
$
151,946

Due After 15
Years
$
96,991
20,309
—
829
—
118,129
1,584
2,075
866
1,667
64
6,256
$
124,385

$

$

Total
229,741
26,831
93,421
106,236
156
456,385
361,393
126,999
69,766
13,644
17,560
589,362
1,045,747

Amount due after one year at:
Variable Interest
Rates
$
83,441
22,438
—
2,857
—
108,736
223,099
75,355
49,247
3,696
109
351,506
$
460,242

Fixed Interest
Rates
$
140,640
4,142
—
37,502
—
182,284
41,141
1,982
1,320
7,211
6,836
58,490
$
240,774

$

$

Total
229,741
26,831
93,421
106,236
156
456,385
361,393
126,999
69,766
13,644
17,560
589,362
1,045,747

Includes loans accounted for under the fair value option.

Bank of America 2022 119

Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses increased $379 million from
December 31, 2021 to $14.2 billion at December 31, 2022,
which included a $202 million reserve increase related to the
consumer portfolio and a $177 million reserve increase related
to the commercial portfolio. The increase in the allowance was

primarily driven by loan growth and a dampened macroeconomic
outlook, partially offset by a reserve release for reduced
pandemic uncertainties.
Table 41 presents an allocation of the allowance for credit
losses by product type at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Table 41 Allocation of the Allowance for Credit Losses by Product Type

Amount
(Dollars in millions)

Percent of
Loans and
Percent of
Leases
Total
Outstanding (1)
December 31, 2022

Amount

Percent of
Loans and
Percent of
Leases
Total
Outstanding (1)
December 31, 2021

Allowance for loan and lease losses

Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Other consumer
Total consumer
U.S. commercial (2)
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
Total commercial
Allowance for loan and lease losses
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments
Allowance for credit losses

$

$

328
92
6,136
585
96
7,237
3,007
1,194
1,192
52
5,445
12,682
1,540
14,222

2.59 %
0.73
48.38
4.61
0.76
57.07
23.71
9.41
9.40
0.41
42.93
100.00 %

0.14 %
0.35
6.57
0.55
n/m
1.59
0.80
0.96
1.71
0.38
0.93
1.22

$

$

351
206
5,907
523
46
7,033
3,019
975
1,292
68
5,354
12,387
1,456
13,843

2.83 %
1.66
47.70
4.22
0.37
56.78
24.37
7.87
10.43
0.55
43.22
100.00 %

0.16 %
0.74
7.25
0.51
n/m
1.62
0.87
0.86
2.05
0.46
1.00
1.28

(1)

Ratios are calculated as allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of loans and leases outstanding excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
(2)
Includes allowance for loan and lease losses for U.S. small business commercial loans of $844 million and $1.2 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
n/m = not meaningful

Net charge-offs for both 2022 and 2021 were $2.2 billion as
credit card losses, which remained near historic lows, were
partially offset by higher overdrafts charged off in other
consumer due to payment activity related to checking accounts.
The provision for credit losses increased $7.1 billion to an
expense of $2.5 billion during 2022 compared to 2021. The
provision for credit losses in 2022 was primarily driven by loan
growth and a dampened macroeconomic outlook, partially offset
by a reserve release for reduced pandemic uncertainties. The
provision for credit losses for the consumer portfolio, including
unfunded lending commitments, increased $3.2 billion to an
expense of $2.0 billion during 2022 compared to 2021. The

120 Bank of America 2022

provision for credit losses for the commercial portfolio, including
unfunded lending commitments, increased $3.9 billion to an
expense of $495 million for 2022 compared to 2021.
Table 42 presents a rollforward of the allowance for credit
losses, including certain loan and allowance ratios for 2022 and
2021. For more information on the Corporation’s credit loss
accounting policies and activity related to the allowance for
credit losses, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leases and
Allowance for Credit Losses to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Table 42 Allowance for Credit Losses
(Dollars in millions)

Allowance for loan and lease losses, January 1
Loans and leases charged off
Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Other consumer
Total consumer charge-offs
U.S. commercial (1)
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
Total commercial charge-offs
Total loans and leases charged off
Recoveries of loans and leases previously charged off
Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Other consumer
Total consumer recoveries
U.S. commercial (2)
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
Total commercial recoveries
Total recoveries of loans and leases previously charged off
Net charge-offs
Provision for loan and lease losses
Other
Allowance for loan and lease losses, December 31
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, January 1
Provision for unfunded lending commitments
Other
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, December 31
Allowance for credit losses, December 31

$

$

2022
12,387

$

2021
18,802

(161)
(45)
(1,985)
(232)
(538)
(2,961)
(354)
(41)
(75)
(8)
(478)
(3,439)

(34)
(44)
(2,411)
(297)
(292)
(3,078)
(626)
(47)
(46)
—
(719)
(3,797)

89
135
651
214
17
1,106
129
20
9
3
161
1,267
(2,172)
2,460
7
12,682
1,456
83
1
1,540
14,222

62
163
688
296
22
1,231
298
12
12
1
323
1,554
(2,243)
(4,173)
1
12,387
1,878
(421)
(1)
1,456
13,843

$

(3)

Loan and allowance ratios :
Loans and leases outstanding at December 31
$ 1,039,976
Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total loans and leases outstanding at December 31
1.22 %
1.59
Consumer allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total consumer loans and leases outstanding at December 31
Commercial allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total commercial loans and leases outstanding at December 31
0.93
Average loans and leases outstanding
$ 1,010,799
Net charge-offs as a percentage of average loans and leases outstanding
0.21 %
Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total nonperforming loans and leases at December 31
333
Ratio of the allowance for loan and lease losses at December 31 to net charge-offs
5.84
Amounts included in allowance for loan and lease losses for loans and leases that are excluded from nonperforming loans and
leases at December 31 (4)
$
6,998
Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total nonperforming loans and leases, excluding the allowance for loan and
lease losses for loans and leases that are excluded from nonperforming loans and leases at December 31 (4)
149 %
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

$

$

$

971,305
1.28 %
1.62
1.00
913,354
0.25 %
271
5.52
7,027
117 %

Includes U.S. small business commercial charge-offs of $203 million in 2022 compared to $425 million in 2021.
Includes U.S. small business commercial recoveries of $49 million in 2022 compared to $74 million in 2021.
Ratios are calculated as allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of loans and leases outstanding excluding loans accounted for under the fair value option.
Primarily includes amounts related to credit card and unsecured consumer lending portfolios in Consumer Banking.

Bank of America 2022 121

Market Risk Management
Market risk is the risk that changes in market conditions may
adversely impact the value of assets or liabilities, or otherwise
negatively impact earnings. This risk is inherent in the financial
instruments associated with our operations, primarily within our
Global Markets segment. We are also exposed to these risks in
other areas of the Corporation (e.g., our ALM activities). In the
event of market stress, these risks could have a material
impact on our results. For more information, see Interest Rate
Risk Management for the Banking Book on page 126.
Our traditional banking loan and deposit products are nontrading positions and are generally reported at amortized cost
for assets or the amount owed for liabilities (historical cost).
However, these positions are still subject to changes in
economic value based on varying market conditions, with one of
the primary risks being changes in the levels of interest rates.
The risk of adverse changes in the economic value of our nontrading positions arising from changes in interest rates is
managed through our ALM activities. We have elected to
account for certain assets and liabilities under the fair value
option.
Our trading positions are reported at fair value with changes
reflected in income. Trading positions are subject to various
changes in market-based risk factors. The majority of this risk is
generated by our activities in the interest rate, foreign exchange,
credit, equity and commodities markets. In addition, the values
of assets and liabilities could change due to market liquidity,
correlations across markets and expectations of market
volatility. We seek to manage these risk exposures by using a
variety of techniques that encompass a broad range of financial
instruments. The key risk management techniques are
discussed in more detail in the Trading Risk Management
section.
GRM is responsible for providing senior management with a
clear and comprehensive understanding of the trading risks to
which we are exposed. These responsibilities include ownership
of market risk policy, developing and maintaining quantitative
risk models, calculating aggregated risk measures, establishing
and monitoring position limits consistent with risk appetite,
conducting daily reviews and analysis of trading inventory,
approving material risk exposures and fulfilling regulatory
requirements. Market risks that impact businesses outside of
Global Markets are monitored and governed by their respective
governance functions.
Model risk is the potential for adverse consequences from
decisions based on incorrect or misused model outputs and
reports. Given that models are used across the Corporation,
model risk impacts all risk types including credit, market and
operational risks. The Enterprise Model Risk Policy defines
model risk standards, consistent with our Risk Framework and
risk appetite, prevailing regulatory guidance and industry best
practice. All models, including risk management, valuation and
regulatory capital models, must meet certain validation criteria,
including effective challenge of the conceptual soundness of the
model, independent model testing and ongoing monitoring
through outcomes analysis and benchmarking. The Enterprise
Model Risk Committee, a subcommittee of the MRC, oversees
that model standards are consistent with model risk
requirements and monitors the effective challenge in the model
validation process across the Corporation.

Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk represents exposures to instruments whose
values vary with the level or volatility of interest rates. These
instruments include, but are not limited to, loans, debt

122 Bank of America 2022

securities, certain trading-related assets and liabilities,
deposits, borrowings and derivatives. Hedging instruments used
to mitigate these risks include derivatives such as options,
futures, forwards and swaps.

Foreign Exchange Risk
Foreign exchange risk represents exposures to changes in the
values of current holdings and future cash flows denominated in
currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The types of instruments
exposed to this risk include investments in non-U.S.
subsidiaries, foreign currency-denominated loans and securities,
future cash flows in foreign currencies arising from foreign
exchange transactions, foreign currency-denominated debt and
various foreign exchange derivatives whose values fluctuate with
changes in the level or volatility of currency exchange rates or
non-U.S. interest rates. Hedging instruments used to mitigate
this risk include foreign exchange options, currency swaps,
futures, forwards, and foreign currency-denominated debt and
deposits.

Mortgage Risk
Mortgage risk represents exposures to changes in the values of
mortgage-related instruments. The values of these instruments
are sensitive to prepayment rates, mortgage rates, agency debt
ratings, default, market liquidity, government participation and
interest rate volatility. Our exposure to these instruments takes
several forms. For example, we trade and engage in marketmaking activities in a variety of mortgage securities including
whole loans, pass-through certificates, commercial mortgages
and collateralized mortgage obligations including collateralized
debt obligations using mortgages as underlying collateral. In
addition, we originate a variety of MBS, which involves the
accumulation of mortgage-related loans in anticipation of
eventual securitization, and we may hold positions in mortgage
securities and residential mortgage loans as part of the ALM
portfolio. We also record MSRs as part of our mortgage
origination activities. Hedging instruments used to mitigate this
risk include derivatives such as options, swaps, futures and
forwards as well as securities including MBS and U.S. Treasury
securities. For more information, see Mortgage Banking Risk
Management on page 127.

Equity Market Risk
Equity market risk represents exposures to securities that
represent an ownership interest in a corporation in the form of
domestic and foreign common stock or other equity-linked
instruments. Instruments that would lead to this exposure
include, but are not limited to, the following: common stock,
exchange-traded funds, American Depositary Receipts,
convertible bonds, listed equity options (puts and calls), OTC
equity options, equity total return swaps, equity index futures
and other equity derivative products. Hedging instruments used
to mitigate this risk include options, futures, swaps, convertible
bonds and cash positions.

Commodity Risk
Commodity risk represents exposures to instruments traded in
the petroleum, natural gas, power and metals markets. These
instruments consist primarily of futures, forwards, swaps and
options. Hedging instruments used to mitigate this risk include
options, futures and swaps in the same or similar commodity
product, as well as cash positions.

Issuer Credit Risk
Issuer credit risk represents exposures to changes in the
creditworthiness of individual issuers or groups of issuers. Our
portfolio is exposed to issuer credit risk where the value of an
asset may be adversely impacted by changes in the levels of
credit spreads, by credit migration or by defaults. Hedging
instruments used to mitigate this risk include bonds, CDS and
other credit fixed-income instruments.

Market Liquidity Risk
Market liquidity risk represents the risk that the level of
expected market activity changes dramatically and, in certain
cases, may even cease. This exposes us to the risk that we will
not be able to transact business and execute trades in an
orderly manner which may impact our results. This impact could
be further exacerbated if expected hedging or pricing
correlations are compromised by disproportionate demand or
lack of demand for certain instruments. We utilize various risk
mitigating techniques as discussed in more detail in Trading
Risk Management.

Trading Risk Management
To evaluate risks in our trading activities, we focus on the actual
and potential volatility of revenues generated by individual
positions as well as portfolios of positions. Various techniques
and procedures are utilized to enable the most complete
understanding of these risks. Quantitative measures of market
risk are evaluated on a daily basis from a single position to the
portfolio of the Corporation. These measures include
sensitivities of positions to various market risk factors, such as
the potential impact on revenue from a one basis point change
in interest rates, and statistical measures utilizing both actual
and hypothetical market moves, such as VaR and stress
testing. Periods of extreme market stress influence the
reliability of these techniques to varying degrees. Qualitative
evaluations of market risk utilize the suite of quantitative risk
measures while understanding each of their respective
limitations. Additionally, risk managers independently evaluate
the risk of the portfolios under the current market environment
and potential future environments.
VaR is a common statistic used to measure market risk as it
allows the aggregation of market risk factors, including the
effects of portfolio diversification. A VaR model simulates the
value of a portfolio under a range of scenarios in order to
generate a distribution of potential gains and losses. VaR
represents the loss a portfolio is not expected to exceed more
than a certain number of times per period, based on a specified
holding period, confidence level and window of historical data.
We use one VaR model consistently across the trading
portfolios and it uses a historical simulation approach based on
a three-year window of historical data. Our primary VaR statistic
is equivalent to a 99 percent confidence level, which means
that for a VaR with a one-day holding period, there should not be
losses in excess of VaR, on average, 99 out of 100 trading
days.
Within any VaR model, there are significant and numerous
assumptions that will differ from company to company. The
accuracy of a VaR model depends on the availability and quality
of historical data for each of the risk factors in the portfolio. A
VaR model may require additional modeling assumptions for
new products that do not have the necessary historical market
data or for less liquid positions for which accurate daily prices
are not consistently available. For positions with insufficient
historical data for the VaR calculation, the process for
establishing an appropriate proxy is based on fundamental and

statistical analysis of the new product or less liquid position.
This analysis identifies reasonable alternatives that replicate
both the expected volatility and correlation to other market risk
factors that the missing data would be expected to experience.
VaR may not be indicative of realized revenue volatility as
changes in market conditions or in the composition of the
portfolio can have a material impact on the results. In particular,
the historical data used for the VaR calculation might indicate
higher or lower levels of portfolio diversification than will be
experienced. In order for the VaR model to reflect current market
conditions, we update the historical data underlying our VaR
model on a weekly basis, or more frequently during periods of
market stress, and regularly review the assumptions underlying
the model. A minor portion of risks related to our trading
positions is not included in VaR. These risks are reviewed as
part of our ICAAP. For more information regarding ICAAP, see
Capital Management on page 96.
GRM continually reviews, evaluates and enhances our VaR
model so that it reflects the material risks in our trading
portfolio. Changes to the VaR model are reviewed and approved
prior to implementation and any material changes are reported
to management through the appropriate management
committees.
Trading limits on quantitative risk measures, including VaR,
are independently set by Global Markets Risk Management and
reviewed on a regular basis so that trading limits remain
relevant and within our overall risk appetite for market risks.
Trading limits are reviewed in the context of market liquidity,
volatility and strategic business priorities. Trading limits are set
at both a granular level to allow for extensive coverage of risks
as well as at aggregated portfolios to account for correlations
among risk factors. All trading limits are approved at least
annually. Approved trading limits are stored and tracked in a
centralized limits management system. Trading limit excesses
are communicated to management for review. Certain
quantitative market risk measures and corresponding limits
have been identified as critical in the Corporation’s Risk
Appetite Statement. These risk appetite limits are reported on a
daily basis and are approved at least annually by the ERC and
the Board.
In periods of market stress, Global Markets senior leadership
communicates daily to discuss losses, key risk positions and
any limit excesses. As a result of this process, the businesses
may selectively reduce risk.
Table 43 presents the total market-based portfolio VaR,
which is the combination of the total covered positions (and
less liquid trading positions) portfolio and the fair value option
portfolio. Covered positions are defined by regulatory standards
as trading assets and liabilities, both on- and off-balance sheet,
that meet a defined set of specifications. These specifications
identify the most liquid trading positions which are intended to
be held for a short-term horizon and where we are able to hedge
the material risk elements in a two-way market. Positions in less
liquid markets, or where there are restrictions on the ability to
trade the positions, typically do not qualify as covered positions.
Foreign exchange and commodity positions are always
considered covered positions, except for structural foreign
currency positions that are excluded with prior regulatory
approval.
In addition, Table 43 presents our fair value option portfolio,
which includes substantially all of the funded and unfunded
exposures for which we elect the fair value option, and their
corresponding hedges. Additionally, market risk VaR for trading
activities as presented in Table 43 differs from VaR used for
regulatory capital calculations due to the holding period being

Bank of America 2022 123

used. The holding period for VaR used for regulatory capital
calculations is 10 days, while for the market risk VaR presented
below, it is one day. Both measures utilize the same process
and methodology.
The total market-based portfolio VaR results in Table 43
include market risk to which we are exposed from all business
segments, excluding credit valuation adjustment (CVA), DVA and
related hedges. The majority of this portfolio is within the Global
Markets segment.
Table 43 presents year-end, average, high and low daily
trading VaR for 2022 and 2021 using a 99 percent confidence

level. The amounts disclosed in Table 43 and Table 44 align to
the view of covered positions used in the Basel 3 capital
calculations. Foreign exchange and commodity positions are
always considered covered positions, regardless of trading or
banking treatment for the trade, except for structural foreign
currency positions that are excluded with prior regulatory
approval.
The annual average of total covered positions and less liquid
trading positions portfolio VaR increased for 2022 compared to
2021 driven by heightened market volatility and reduced
diversification across asset classes.

Table 43 Market Risk VaR for Trading Activities
2021

2022
Year
End

(Dollars in millions)
Foreign exchange
Interest rate
Credit
Equity
Commodities
Portfolio diversification

Average
$

39
56
106
33
27
n/a
140
n/a

Low
$

12
24
52
12
7
n/a
42
n/a

$

11
54
73
21
6
(114)
51
8

$

Average
12
40
69
24
8
(100)
53
20

$

High (1)
21
80
84
35
28
n/a
85
n/a

Low (1)
$

5
16
53
19
4
n/a
34
n/a

Total covered positions and less liquid trading positions portfolio
Fair value option loans
Fair value option hedges
Fair value option portfolio diversification

130
48
16
(38)

108
51
17
(36)

236
65
24
n/a

61
37
13
n/a

59
51
15
(27)

73
50
16
(32)

125
65
20
n/a

46
31
11
n/a

Total fair value option portfolio
Portfolio diversification

26
9
165

32
(11)
129

44
n/a
287

23
n/a
70

39
(24)
74

34
(10)
97

53
n/a
169

23
n/a
54

$

21
36
71
20
13
(91)
70
38

High

Total covered positions portfolio
Impact from less liquid exposures (2)

$

$

Year
End

(1)

38
36
76
18
8
(81)
95
35

Total market-based portfolio

$

(1)

$

$

(1)

The high and low for each portfolio may have occurred on different trading days than the high and low for the components. Therefore the impact from less liquid exposures and the amount of
portfolio diversification, which is the difference between the total portfolio and the sum of the individual components, is not relevant.
(2)
Impact is net of diversification effects between the covered positions and less liquid trading positions portfolios.
n/a = not applicable

The following graph presents the daily covered positions and less liquid trading positions portfolio VaR for 2022, corresponding to
the data in Table 43.

Additional VaR statistics produced within our single VaR model are provided in Table 44 at the same level of detail as in Table
43. Evaluating VaR with additional statistics allows for an increased understanding of the risks in the portfolio, as the historical
market data used in the VaR calculation does not necessarily follow a predefined statistical distribution. Table 44 presents average
trading VaR statistics at 99 percent and 95 percent confidence levels for 2022 and 2021.

124 Bank of America 2022

Table 44 Average Market Risk VaR for Trading Activities – 99 percent and 95 percent VaR Statistics
(Dollars in millions)

Foreign exchange
Interest rate
Credit
Equity
Commodities
Portfolio diversification
Total covered positions portfolio
Impact from less liquid exposures
Total covered positions and less liquid trading positions portfolio
Fair value option loans
Fair value option hedges
Fair value option portfolio diversification
Total fair value option portfolio
Portfolio diversification
Total market-based portfolio

Backtesting
The accuracy of the VaR methodology is evaluated by
backtesting, which compares the daily VaR results, utilizing a
one-day holding period, against a comparable subset of trading
revenue. A backtesting excess occurs when a trading loss
exceeds the VaR for the corresponding day. These excesses are
evaluated to understand the positions and market moves that
produced the trading loss with a goal to help confirm that the
VaR methodology accurately represents those losses. We
expect the frequency of trading losses in excess of VaR to be in
line with the confidence level of the VaR statistic being tested.
For example, with a 99 percent confidence level, we expect one
trading loss in excess of VaR every 100 days or between two to
three trading losses in excess of VaR over the course of a year.
The number of backtesting excesses observed can differ from
the statistically expected number of excesses if the current level
of market volatility is materially different than the level of market
volatility that existed during the three years of historical data
used in the VaR calculation.
The trading revenue used for backtesting is defined by
regulatory agencies in order to most closely align with the VaR
component of the regulatory capital calculation. This revenue
differs from total trading-related revenue in that it excludes
revenue from trading activities that either do not generate
market risk or the market risk cannot be included in VaR. Some
examples of the types of revenue excluded for backtesting are
fees, commissions, reserves, net interest income and intra-day
trading revenues.
We conduct daily backtesting on the VaR results used for
regulatory capital calculations as well as the VaR results for key
legal entities, regions and risk factors. These results are
reported to senior market risk management. Senior
management regularly reviews and evaluates the results of
these tests.
During 2022, there was one day where this subset of trading
revenue had losses that exceeded our total covered portfolio
VaR, utilizing a one-day holding period.

Total Trading-related Revenue
Total trading-related revenue, excluding brokerage fees, and
CVA, DVA and funding valuation adjustment gains (losses),
represents the total amount earned from trading positions,
including market-based net interest income, which are taken in
a diverse range of financial instruments and markets. For more
information on fair value, see Note 20 – Fair Value
Measurements to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

2022
99 percent
95 percent
$
21 $
12
36
17
71
28
20
11
13
7
(91)
(46)
70
29
38
7
108
36
51
14
17
10
(13)
(36)
32
11
(11)
(7)
$
129 $
40

2021
99 percent
95 percent
$
12 $
8
40
20
69
21
24
12
8
4
(100)
(39)
53
26
20
2
73
28
50
12
16
9
(32)
(9)
34
12
(10)
(7)
$
97 $
33

Trading-related revenue can be volatile and is largely driven by
general market conditions and customer demand. Also, tradingrelated revenue is dependent on the volume and type of
transactions, the level of risk assumed, and the volatility of
price and rate movements at any given time within the everchanging market environment. Significant daily revenue by
business is monitored and the primary drivers of these are
reviewed.
The following histogram is a graphic depiction of trading
volatility and illustrates the daily level of trading-related revenue
for 2022 and 2021. During 2022, positive trading-related
revenue was recorded for 99 percent of the trading days, of
which 90 percent were daily trading gains of over $25 million,
and the largest loss was $9 million. This compares to 2021
where positive trading-related revenue was recorded for 97
percent of the trading days, of which 80 percent were daily
trading gains of over $25 million, and the largest loss was $45
million.

Trading Portfolio Stress Testing
Because the very nature of a VaR model suggests results can
exceed our estimates and it is dependent on a limited historical
window, we also stress test our portfolio using scenario
analysis. This analysis estimates the change in the value of our
trading portfolio that may result from abnormal market
movements.
A set of scenarios, categorized as either historical or
hypothetical, are computed daily for the overall trading portfolio
and individual businesses. These scenarios include shocks to
underlying market risk factors that may be well beyond the
shocks found in the historical data used to calculate VaR.

Bank of America 2022 125

Historical scenarios simulate the impact of the market moves
that occurred during a period of extended historical market
stress. Generally, a multi-week period representing the most
severe point during a crisis is selected for each historical
scenario. Hypothetical scenarios provide estimated portfolio
impacts from potential future market stress events. Scenarios
are reviewed and updated in response to changing positions
and new economic or political information. In addition, new or
ad hoc scenarios are developed to address specific potential
market events or particular vulnerabilities in the portfolio. The
stress tests are reviewed on a regular basis and the results are
presented to senior management.
Stress testing for the trading portfolio is integrated with
enterprise-wide stress testing and incorporated into the limits
framework. The macroeconomic scenarios used for enterprisewide stress testing purposes differ from the typical trading
portfolio scenarios in that they have a longer time horizon and
the results are forecasted over multiple periods for use in
consolidated capital and liquidity planning. For more
information, see Managing Risk on page 93.

Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking
Book
The following discussion presents net interest income for
banking book activities.
Interest rate risk represents the most significant market risk
exposure to our banking book balance sheet. Interest rate risk
is measured as the potential change in net interest income
caused by movements in market interest rates. Client-facing
activities, primarily lending and deposit-taking, create interest
rate sensitive positions on our balance sheet.
We prepare forward-looking forecasts of net interest income.
The baseline forecast takes into consideration expected future
business growth, ALM positioning and the future direction of
interest rate movements as implied by market-based forward
curves.
We then measure and evaluate the impact that alternative
interest rate scenarios have on the baseline forecast in order to
assess interest rate sensitivity under varied conditions. The net
interest income forecast is frequently updated for changing
assumptions and differing outlooks based on economic trends,
market conditions and business strategies. Thus, we continually
monitor our banking book balance sheet position in order to
maintain an acceptable level of exposure to interest rate
changes.
The interest rate scenarios that we analyze incorporate
balance sheet assumptions such as loan and deposit growth
and pricing, changes in funding mix, product repricing, maturity
characteristics and investment securities premium amortization.
Our overall goal is to manage interest rate risk so that
movements in interest rates do not significantly adversely affect
earnings and capital.
Table 45 presents the spot and 12-month forward rates
used in developing the forward curve used in our baseline
forecasts at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

126 Bank of America 2022

Table 45 Forward Rates

Spot rates
12-month forward rates

December 31, 2022
Federal
Three-month
Funds
LIBOR
4.50 %
4.77 %
4.75
4.78

10-Year
Swap
3.84 %
3.62

Spot rates
12-month forward rates

December 31, 2021
0.25 %
0.21 %
1.00
1.07

1.58 %
1.84

Table 46 shows the pretax impact to forecasted net interest
income over the next 12 months from December 31, 2022 and
2021 resulting from instantaneous parallel and non-parallel
shocks to the market-based forward curve. Periodically, we
evaluate the scenarios presented so that they are meaningful in
the context of the current rate environment. The interest rate
scenarios also assume U.S. dollar interest rates are floored at
zero. Depending on the level of interest rates, Down-rate
scenarios may not receive the full impact of the rate shock,
particularly in low rate environments.
The overall decrease in asset sensitivity, as shown in the
following table, to Up-rate scenarios was primarily due to an
increase in long-end and short-end rates. We continue to be
asset sensitive to a parallel upward move in interest rates with
the majority of that impact coming from the short end of the
yield curve. Additionally, higher interest rates negatively impact
the fair value of our debt securities classified as available for
sale and adversely affect accumulated OCI and thus capital
levels under the Basel 3 capital rules. Under instantaneous
upward parallel shifts, the near-term adverse impact to Basel 3
capital would be reduced over time by offsetting positive
impacts to net interest income generated from the banking book
activities. For more information on Basel 3, see Capital
Management – Regulatory Capital on page 97.

Table 46 Estimated Banking Book Net Interest Income
Sensitivity to Curve Changes
(Dollars in millions)

Parallel Shifts
+100 bps
instantaneous shift
-100 bps
instantaneous shift
Flatteners
Short-end
instantaneous change
Long-end
instantaneous change
Steepeners
Short-end
instantaneous change
Long-end
instantaneous change
n/m = not meaningful

Short
Rate
(bps)

Long
Rate
(bps)

December 31
2021
2022

+100

+100

-100

-100

+100

—

—

-100

(157)

n/m

-100

—

(4,420)

n/m

—

+100

$

3,829
(4,591)

3,698

131

$

6,542
n/m

4,982

1,646

The sensitivity analysis in Table 46 assumes that we take no
action in response to these rate shocks and does not assume
any change in other macroeconomic variables normally
correlated with changes in interest rates. As part of our ALM
activities, we use securities, certain residential mortgages, and
interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives in managing
interest rate sensitivity.
The behavior of our deposit portfolio in the baseline forecast
and in alternate interest rate scenarios is a key assumption in
our projected estimates of net interest income. The sensitivity
analysis in Table 46 assumes no change in deposit portfolio
size or mix from the baseline forecast in alternate rate
environments. In higher rate scenarios, any customer activity
resulting in the replacement of low-cost or noninterest-bearing
deposits with higher yielding deposits or market-based funding
would reduce our benefit in those scenarios.

interest rates also impact the value of interest rate lock
commitments (IRLCs) and the related residential first mortgage
LHFS between the date of the IRLC and the date the loans are
sold to the secondary market. An increase in mortgage interest
rates typically leads to a decrease in the value of these
instruments. Conversely, when there is an increase in interest
rates, the value of the MSRs will increase driven by lower
prepayment expectations. Because the interest rate risks of
these hedged items offset, we combine them into one overall
hedged item with one combined economic hedge portfolio
consisting of derivative contracts and securities.
During 2022, 2021 and 2020, we recorded gains of $78
million, $39 million and $321 million. For more information on
MSRs, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.

Interest Rate and Foreign Exchange Derivative
Contracts

Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions,
material financial loss or damage to the reputation of the
Corporation arising from the failure of the Corporation to comply
with the requirements of applicable laws, rules, regulations and
our internal policies and procedures (collectively, applicable
laws, rules and regulations). We are subject to comprehensive
regulation under federal and state laws, rules and regulations in
the U.S. and the laws of the various jurisdictions in which we
operate, including those related to financial crimes and antimoney laundering, market conduct, trading activities, fair
lending, privacy, data protection and unfair, deceptive or abusive
acts or practices.
Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate
or failed processes or systems, people or external events, and
includes legal risk. Operational risk may occur anywhere in the
Corporation, including third-party business processes, and is not
limited to operations functions. The Corporation faces a number
of key operational risks including third-party risk, model risk,
conduct risk, technology risk, information security risk and data
risk. Operational risk can result in financial losses and
reputational impacts and is a component in the calculation of
total RWA used in the Basel 3 capital calculation. For more
information on Basel 3 calculations, see Capital Management
on page 96.
FLUs and control functions are first and foremost
responsible for managing all aspects of their businesses,
including their compliance and operational risk. FLUs and
control functions are required to understand their business
processes and related risks and controls, including third-party
dependencies and the related regulatory requirements, and
monitor and report on the effectiveness of the control
environment. In order to actively monitor and assess the
performance of their processes and controls, they must conduct
comprehensive quality assurance activities and identify issues
and risks to remediate control gaps and weaknesses. FLUs and
control functions must also adhere to compliance and
operational risk appetite limits to meet strategic, capital and
financial planning objectives. Finally, FLUs and control functions
are responsible for the proactive identification, management
and escalation of compliance and operational risks across the
Corporation. Collectively, these efforts are important to
strengthen their compliance and operational resiliency, which is
the ability to deliver critical operations through disruption.
Global
Compliance
and
Operational
Risk
teams
independently assess compliance and operational risk, monitor
business activities and processes and evaluate FLUs and
control functions for adherence to applicable laws, rules and
regulations, including identifying issues and risks, and reporting

We use interest rate and foreign exchange derivative contracts
in our ALM activities to manage our interest rate and foreign
exchange risks. Specifically, we use those derivatives to
manage both the variability in cash flows and changes in fair
value of various assets and liabilities arising from those risks.
Our interest rate derivative contracts are generally non-leveraged
swaps tied to various benchmark interest rates and foreign
exchange basis swaps, options, futures and forwards, and our
foreign exchange contracts include cross-currency interest rate
swaps, foreign currency futures contracts, foreign currency
forward contracts and options.
The derivatives used in our ALM activities can be split into
two broad categories: designated accounting hedges and other
risk management derivatives. Designated accounting hedges
are primarily used to manage our exposure to interest rates as
described in the Interest Rate Risk Management for the Banking
Book section and are included in the sensitivities presented in
Table 46. The Corporation also uses foreign currency derivatives
in accounting hedges to manage substantially all of the foreign
exchange risk of our foreign operations. By hedging the foreign
exchange risk of our foreign operations, the Corporation's
market risk exposure in this area is not significant.
Risk management derivatives are predominantly used to
hedge foreign exchange risks related to various foreign currencydenominated assets and liabilities and eliminate substantially
all foreign currency exposures in the cash flows of the
Corporation’s non-trading foreign currency-denominated financial
instruments. These foreign exchange derivatives are sensitive to
other market risk exposures such as cross-currency basis
spreads and interest rate risk. However, as these features are
not a significant component of these foreign exchange
derivatives, the market risk related to this exposure is not
significant. For more information on the accounting for
derivatives, see Note 3 – Derivatives to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.

Mortgage Banking Risk Management
We originate, fund and service mortgage loans, which subject us
to credit, liquidity and interest rate risks, among others. We
determine whether loans will be held for investment or held for
sale at the time of commitment and manage credit and liquidity
risks by selling or securitizing a portion of the loans we
originate.
Interest rate risk and market risk can be substantial in the
mortgage business. Changes in interest rates and other market
factors impact the volume of mortgage originations. Changes in

Compliance and Operational Risk Management

Bank of America 2022 127

on the state of the control environment. Corporate Audit
provides an independent assessment and validation through
testing of key compliance and operational risk processes and
controls across the Corporation.
The Corporation's Global Compliance – Enterprise Policy and
Operational Risk Management – Enterprise Policy set the
requirements for reporting compliance and operational risk
information to executive management as well as the Board or
appropriate Board-level committees and reflect Global
Compliance and Operational Risk’s responsibilities for
conducting independent oversight of the Corporation’s
compliance and operational risk management activities. The
Board provides oversight of compliance risk through its Audit
Committee and the ERC, and operational risk through its ERC.
A key operational risk facing the Corporation is information
security, which includes cybersecurity. Cybersecurity risk
includes exposure to failures or interruptions of service or
security breaches resulting from malicious technological attacks
that impact the confidentiality, integrity or availability of our or
third parties' operations, systems or data. The Corporation
seeks to mitigate information security risk and associated
reputational and compliance risk by employing a multi-layered
and intelligence-led Global Information Security Program focused
on preparing for, preventing, detecting, mitigating, responding to
and recovering from cyber threats and incidents and effectively
operating the Corporation’s processes. Additionally, our
business continuity policy, standards and procedures are
designed to maintain the availability of business functions and
enable impacted units within the Corporation and third parties
to achieve strategic objectives in the event of a cybersecurity
incident.
The Global Information Security Program is supported by
three lines of defense. The Global Information Security Team
within the first line of defense is responsible for the day-to-day
management of the Global Information Security Program, which
includes defining policies and procedures to safeguard the
Corporation’s information systems and data, conducting
vulnerability and third-party information security assessments,
information security event management (e.g., responding to
ransomware and distributed denial of service attacks),
evaluation of external cyber intelligence, supporting industry
cybersecurity efforts and working with governmental agencies,
and developing employee training to support adherence to the
Corporation’s policies and procedures. As the second line of
defense, Global Compliance and Operational Risk independently
assesses, monitors and tests information security risk across
the Corporation, as well as the effectiveness of the Global
Information Security Program. Corporate Audit serves as the
third line of defense, conducting additional independent review
and validation of the first-line processes and functions. As part
of our Global Information Security Program, we leverage both
internal and external assessments and partnerships with
industry leaders to help approach information security
holistically. Additionally the Corporation maintains a
comprehensive enterprise-wide program that defines standards
for the planning, sourcing, management, and oversight of thirdparty relationships and third-party access to its system,
facilities, and/or confidential or proprietary data for a business
purpose or supervisory function.
Through established governance structures, we have
processes to help facilitate appropriate and effective oversight
of information security risk. These routines enable our three
lines of defense and management to debate information
security risks and monitor control performance to allow for
further escalation to executive management, management and

128 Bank of America 2022

Board-level committees or to the Board, as appropriate. The
Board is actively engaged in the oversight of Bank of America’s
Global Information Security Program and devotes significant
time and attention to the oversight of cybersecurity and
information security risk. The Board regularly discusses
cybersecurity and information security risks with the Chief
Technology and Information Officer and the Chief Information
Security Officer. Additionally, the ERC receives regular reporting,
and reviews and approves the Information Security Program and
Policy on an annual basis.

Reputational Risk Management
Reputational risk is the risk that negative perception of the
Corporation may adversely impact profitability or operations.
Reputational risk may result from many of the Corporation’s
activities, including those related to the management of our
strategic, operational, compliance and credit risks.
The Corporation manages reputational risk through
established policies and controls embedded throughout its
business and risk management processes. We proactively
monitor and identify potential reputational risk events and have
processes established to mitigate reputational risks in a timely
manner. If reputational risk events occur, we focus on
remediating the underlying issue and taking action to minimize
damage to the Corporation’s reputation. The Corporation has
processes and procedures in place to respond to events that
give rise to reputational risk, including educating individuals and
organizations that influence public opinion, implementing
external communication strategies to mitigate the risk, and
informing key stakeholders of potential reputational risks. The
Corporation’s organization and governance structure provides
oversight of reputational risks. Reputational risk reporting is
provided regularly and directly to senior management and the
ERC, which provides primary oversight of reputational risk. In
addition, each FLU has a committee, which includes
representatives from Legal and Risk, that is responsible for the
oversight of reputational risk, including approval for business
activities that present elevated levels of reputational risks.

Climate Risk Management
Climate-related risks are divided into two major categories: (1)
risks related to the physical impacts of climate change, driven
by extreme weather events such as hurricanes and floods, as
well as chronic longer-term shifts such as rising average global
temperatures and sea levels, and (2) risks related to the
transition to a low-carbon economy, which may entail extensive
policy, legal, technology and market changes. These changes
and events may have broad impacts on operations, supply
chains, distribution networks, customers and markets and are
otherwise referred to, respectively, as physical risk and
transition risk. These risks may impact both financial and
nonfinancial risk types. Physical risk may lead to increased
credit risk by diminishing borrowers’ repayment capacity or
impacting the value of collateral. Physical risk may also increase
operational risk by impacting the Corporation’s facilities,
employees, customers or vendors. Transition risks may amplify
credit risk through the financial impacts of changes in policy,
technology or the market on the Corporation or its
counterparties. Unanticipated market changes can lead to
sudden price adjustments and give rise to heightened market
risk. In addition, reputational risk may arise, including from our
climate-related practices and disclosures and if we do not meet
our climate-related commitments.
Effective management of climate risk requires coordinated
governance, clearly defined roles and responsibilities and well-

developed processes to identify, measure, monitor and control
risks. As climate risk spans all key risk types, we have
developed and continue to enhance processes to embed
climate risk considerations into our Risk Framework and risk
management programs established for strategic, credit, market,
liquidity, compliance, operational and reputational risks. Our
Environmental and Social Risk Policy Framework aligns with our
Risk Framework and provides additional clarity and transparency
regarding our approach to environmental and social risks,
inclusive of climate risk.
Our governance framework establishes oversight of climate
risk practices and strategies by the Board, supported by its
ERC, as well as the MRC and the Responsible Growth
Committee, both of which are management-level committees
comprised of senior leaders across every major FLU and control
function. The Responsible Growth Committee is supported by
the ESG Disclosure sub-committee, which is responsible for
reviewing and providing oversight of the Corporation’s climate
and ESG-related public disclosures.
Our climate risk management efforts are overseen by an
executive officer who reports to the CRO. The Climate Risk
Council, which consists of leaders across risk, FLU and control
functions, meets routinely to discuss our approach to managing
climate-related risks in line with our Risk Framework.
In 2021, we publicly announced our commitment to achieve
net zero emissions in our financing activities, operations, and
supply chain before 2050 (Net Zero Goal) and set 2030
emissions targets for our operations and supply chain. In
connection with our Net Zero Goal, in 2022, we announced a
target to reduce emissions by 2030 associated with our
financing activities related to auto manufacturing, energy and
power generation (2030 Targets). In our September 2022 Task
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures Report, we
disclosed our 2019 and 2020 financed emissions and
emissions intensity metrics for these sectors, with 2019 serving
as the baseline for our 2030 Targets.
We plan to disclose the financed emissions for additional
portions of our business loan portfolio in 2023, and we plan to
set financing activity emission reduction targets for other key
sectors by April 2024.
Achieving our climate--related goals and targets, including
our Net Zero Goal and 2030 Targets, may require technological
advances, clearly defined roadmaps for industry sectors, new
standards and public policies, including those that improve the
cost of capital for the transition to a low-carbon economy and
better emissions data reporting, as well as ongoing, strong and
active engagement with customers, suppliers, investors,
government officials and other stakeholders.
Given the extended period of these and other climate-related
goals we have established, our initiatives have not resulted in a
significant effect on our results of operations or financial
position in the relevant periods presented herein.
For more information about climate-related matters, including
how the Corporation manages climate risk, and the
Corporation’s climate-related goals and commitments, including
our plans to achieve our Net Zero Goal and 2030 Targets and
progress on our sustainable finance goals, see the
Corporation’s website, including our 2022 Task Force on
Climate-related Financial Disclosures Report and the 2022

Annual Report to shareholders available on the Investor
Relations portion of our website in March 2023. The contents of
the Corporation’s website and 2022 Annual Report to
shareholders are not incorporated by reference into this Annual
Report on Form 10-K. For more information on climate-related
risks, see Item 1A. Risk Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on
Form 10-K.
The foregoing discussion and our discussion in the 2022
Annual Report to shareholders regarding our goals and
commitments with respect to climate risk management,
including environmental transition considerations, include
“forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements are
not guarantees of future results or performance and involve
certain known and unknown risks, uncertainties and
assumptions that are difficult to predict and are often beyond
the Corporation’s control. Actual outcomes and results may
differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, any of
these forward-looking statements.

Complex Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting principles, as described in Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles to the Consolidated
Financial Statements, are essential in understanding the MD&A.
Many of our significant accounting principles require complex
judgments to estimate the values of assets and liabilities. We
have procedures and processes in place to facilitate making
these judgments.
The more judgmental estimates are summarized in the
following discussion. We have identified and described the
development of the variables most important in the estimation
processes that involve mathematical models to derive the
estimates. In many cases, there are numerous alternative
judgments that could be used in the process of determining the
inputs to the models. Where alternatives exist, we have used
the factors that we believe represent the most reasonable value
in developing the inputs. Actual performance that differs from
our estimates of the key variables could materially impact our
results of operations. Separate from the possible future impact
to our results of operations from input and model variables, the
value of our lending portfolio and market-sensitive assets and
liabilities may change subsequent to the balance sheet date,
often significantly, due to the nature and magnitude of future
credit and market conditions. Such credit and market conditions
may change quickly and in unforeseen ways and the resulting
volatility could have a significant, negative effect on future
operating results. These fluctuations would not be indicative of
deficiencies in our models or inputs.

Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses includes the allowance for loan
and lease losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments. Our process for determining the allowance for
credit losses is discussed in Note 1 – Summary of Significant
Accounting Principles and Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and
Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
The determination of the allowance for credit losses is
based on numerous estimates and assumptions, which require

Bank of America 2022 129

a high degree of judgment and are often interrelated. A critical
judgment in the process is the weighting of our forward-looking
macroeconomic scenarios that are incorporated into our
quantitative models. As any one economic outlook is inherently
uncertain, the Corporation uses multiple macroeconomic
scenarios in its ECL calculation, which have included a baseline
scenario derived from consensus estimates, an adverse
scenario reflecting an extended moderate recession, a
downside scenario reflecting persistent inflation and interest
rates above the baseline scenario, a tail risk scenario similar to
the severely adverse scenario used in stress testing and an
upside scenario that considers the potential for improvement
above the baseline scenario. The overall economic outlook is
weighted 95 percent towards a recessionary environment in
2023, with continued inflationary pressures leading to lower
gross domestic product (GDP) and higher unemployment rate
expectations as compared to the prior year. Generally, as the
consensus estimates improve or deteriorate, the allowance for
credit losses will change in a similar direction. There are
multiple variables that drive the macroeconomic scenarios with
the key variables including, but not limited to, U.S. GDP and
unemployment rates. As of December 31, 2021, the weighted
macroeconomic outlook for the U.S. average unemployment rate
was forecasted at 5.2 percent, 4.7 percent and 4.3 percent in
the fourth quarters of 2022, 2023 and 2024, respectively, and
the weighted macroeconomic outlook for U.S. GDP was
forecasted to grow at 2.1 percent, 1.9 percent and 1.9 percent
year-over-year in the fourth quarters of 2022, 2023 and 2024,
respectively. As of December 31, 2022, the latest consensus
estimates for the U.S. average unemployment rate for the fourth
quarter of 2022 was 3.7 percent and U.S. GDP was forecasted
to grow 0.4 percent year-over-year in the fourth quarter of 2022,
reflecting a tighter labor market and depressed growth
expectations compared to our macroeconomic outlook as of
December 31, 2021, and were factored into our allowance for
credit losses estimate as of December 31, 2022. In addition,
as of December 31, 2022, the weighted macroeconomic
outlook for the U.S. average unemployment rate was forecasted
at 5.6 percent and 5.0 percent in the fourth quarters of 2023
and 2024, and the weighted macroeconomic outlook for U.S.
GDP was forecasted to contract 0.4 percent and grow 1.2
percent year-over-year in the fourth quarters of 2023 and 2024.
In addition to the above judgments and estimates, the
allowance for credit losses can also be impacted by
unanticipated changes in asset quality of the portfolio, such as
increases or decreases in credit and/or internal risk ratings in
our commercial portfolio, improvement or deterioration in
borrower delinquencies or credit scores in our credit card
portfolio and increases or decreases in home prices, which is a
primary driver of LTVs, in our consumer real estate portfolio, all
of which have some degree of uncertainty. The allowance for
credit losses increased to $14.2 billion from $13.8 billion at
December 31, 2021, primarily due to loan growth and a
dampened macroeconomic outlook in 2022.
To provide an illustration of the sensitivity of the
macroeconomic scenarios and other assumptions on the
estimate of our allowance for credit losses, the Corporation
compared the December 31, 2022 modeled ECL from the
baseline scenario and our adverse scenario. Relative to the
baseline scenario, the adverse scenario assumed a peak U.S.
unemployment rate of nearly three percentage points higher
than the baseline scenario, a decline in U.S. GDP followed by a
prolonged recovery and a lower home price outlook with a
difference of approximately eight percent at the trough. This

130 Bank of America 2022

sensitivity analysis resulted in a hypothetical increase in the
allowance for credit losses of approximately $4 billion.
While the sensitivity analysis may be useful to understand
how changes in macroeconomic assumptions could impact our
modeled ECLs, it is not meant to forecast how our allowance for
credit losses is expected to change in a different
macroeconomic outlook. Importantly, the analysis does not
incorporate a variety of factors, including qualitative reserves
and the weighting of alternate scenarios, which could have
offsetting effects on the estimate. Considering the variety of
factors contemplated when developing and weighting
macroeconomic outlooks such as recent economic events,
leading economic indicators, views of internal and third-party
economists and industry trends, in addition to other qualitative
factors, the Corporation believes the allowance for credit losses
at December 31, 2022 is appropriate.

Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Under applicable accounting standards, we are required to
maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of
unobservable inputs in measuring fair value. We classify fair
value measurements of financial instruments and MSRs based
on the three-level fair value hierarchy in the accounting
standards.
The fair values of assets and liabilities may include
adjustments, such as market liquidity and credit quality, where
appropriate. Valuations of products using models or other
techniques are sensitive to assumptions used for the significant
inputs. Where market data is available, the inputs used for
valuation reflect that information as of our valuation date. Inputs
to valuation models are considered unobservable if they are
supported by little or no market activity. In periods of extreme
volatility, lessened liquidity or in illiquid markets, there may be
more variability in market pricing or a lack of market data to use
in the valuation process. In keeping with the prudent application
of estimates and management judgment in determining the fair
value of assets and liabilities, we have in place various
processes and controls that include: a model validation policy
that requires review and approval of quantitative models used
for deal pricing, financial statement fair value determination and
risk quantification; a trading product valuation policy that
requires verification of all traded product valuations; and a
periodic review and substantiation of daily profit and loss
reporting for all traded products. Primarily through validation
controls, we utilize both broker and pricing service inputs which
can and do include both market-observable and internallymodeled values and/or valuation inputs. Our reliance on this
information is affected by our understanding of how the broker
and/or pricing service develops its data with a higher degree of
reliance applied to those that are more directly observable and
lesser reliance applied to those developed through their own
internal modeling. For example, broker quotes in less active
markets may only be indicative and therefore less reliable.
These processes and controls are performed independently of
the business. For more information, see Note 20 – Fair Value
Measurements and Note 21 – Fair Value Option to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.

Level 3 Assets and Liabilities
Financial assets and liabilities, and MSRs, where values are
based on valuation techniques that require inputs that are both
unobservable and are significant to the overall fair value
measurement are classified as Level 3 under the fair value
hierarchy established in applicable accounting standards. The
fair value of these Level 3 financial assets and liabilities and

MSRs is determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies or similar techniques for which the determination
of fair value requires significant management judgment or
estimation.
Level 3 financial instruments may be hedged with derivatives
classified as Level 1 or 2; therefore, gains or losses associated
with Level 3 financial instruments may be offset by gains or
losses associated with financial instruments classified in other
levels of the fair value hierarchy. The Level 3 gains and losses
recorded in earnings did not have a significant impact on our
liquidity or capital. We conduct a review of our fair value
hierarchy classifications on a quarterly basis. Transfers into or
out of Level 3 are made if the significant inputs used in the
financial models measuring the fair values of the assets and
liabilities became unobservable or observable, respectively, in
the current marketplace. For more information on transfers into
and out of Level 3 during 2022, 2021 and 2020, see Note 20 –
Fair Value Measurements to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Accrued Income Taxes and Deferred Tax Assets
Accrued income taxes, reported as a component of either other
assets or accrued expenses and other liabilities on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet, represent the net amount of
current income taxes we expect to pay to or receive from various
taxing jurisdictions attributable to our operations to date. We
currently file income tax returns in more than 100 jurisdictions
and consider many factors, including statutory, judicial and
regulatory guidance, in estimating the appropriate accrued
income taxes for each jurisdiction.
Net deferred tax assets, reported as a component of other
assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, represent the net
decrease in taxes expected to be paid in the future because of
net operating loss (NOL) and tax credit carryforwards and

because of future reversals of temporary differences in the
bases of assets and liabilities as measured by tax laws and
their bases as reported in the financial statements. NOL and tax
credit carryforwards result in reductions to future tax liabilities,
and many of these attributes can expire if not utilized within
certain periods. We consider the need for valuation allowances
to reduce net deferred tax assets to the amounts that we
estimate are more likely than not to be realized.
Consistent with the applicable accounting guidance, we
monitor relevant tax authorities and change our estimates of
accrued income taxes and/or net deferred tax assets due to
changes in income tax laws and their interpretation by the
courts and regulatory authorities. These revisions of our
estimates, which also may result from our income tax planning
and from the resolution of income tax audit matters, may be
material to our operating results for any given period.
See Note 19 – Income Taxes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements for a table of significant tax attributes and
additional information. For more information, see Item 1A. Risk
Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The nature of and accounting for goodwill and intangible assets
are discussed in Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles, and Note 7 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
We completed our annual goodwill impairment test as of
June 30, 2022. Based on our assessment, we have concluded
that goodwill was not impaired.

Certain Contingent Liabilities
For more information on the complex judgments associated with
certain contingent liabilities, see Note 12 – Commitments and
Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Bank of America 2022 131

Non-GAAP Reconciliations
Tables 47 and 48 provide reconciliations of certain non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures.

Table 47 Annual Reconciliations to GAAP Financial Measures (1)
(Dollars in millions, shares in thousands)

Reconciliation of average shareholders’ equity to average tangible shareholders’ equity and average tangible common
shareholders’ equity
Shareholders’ equity
Goodwill
Intangible assets (excluding MSRs)
Related deferred tax liabilities
Tangible shareholders’ equity
Preferred stock
Tangible common shareholders’ equity
Reconciliation of year-end shareholders’ equity to year-end tangible shareholders’ equity and year-end tangible common
shareholders’ equity
Shareholders’ equity
Goodwill
Intangible assets (excluding MSRs)
Related deferred tax liabilities
Tangible shareholders’ equity
Preferred stock
Tangible common shareholders’ equity
Reconciliation of year-end assets to year-end tangible assets
Assets
Goodwill
Intangible assets (excluding MSRs)
Related deferred tax liabilities
Tangible assets
(1)

2022

2021

2020

$ 270,299
(69,022)
(2,117)
922
$ 200,082
(28,318)
$ 171,764

$ 273,757
(69,005)
(2,177)
916
$ 203,491
(23,970)
$ 179,521

$ 267,309
(68,951)
(1,862)
821
$ 197,317
(23,624)
$ 173,693

$ 273,197
(69,022)
(2,075)
899
$ 202,999
(28,397)
$ 174,602

$ 270,066
(69,022)
(2,153)
929
$ 199,820
(24,708)
$ 175,112

$ 272,924
(68,951)
(2,151)
920
$ 202,742
(24,510)
$ 178,232

$ 3,051,375
(69,022)
(2,075)
899
$ 2,981,177

$3,169,495
(69,022)
(2,153)
929
$3,099,249

$2,819,627
(68,951)
(2,151)
920
$2,749,445

Presents reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures. For more information on non-GAAP financial measures and ratios we use in assessing the results of the
Corporation, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 79.

Table 48 Quarterly Reconciliations to GAAP Financial Measures (1)
(Dollars in millions)
Reconciliation of average shareholders’ equity to
average tangible shareholders’ equity and average
tangible common shareholders’ equity
Shareholders’ equity
Goodwill
Intangible assets (excluding MSRs)
Related deferred tax liabilities
Tangible shareholders’ equity
Preferred stock
Tangible common shareholders’ equity

(1)

Fourth

2022 Quarters
Third
Second

First

Fourth

2021 Quarters
Third
Second

First

$ 272,629
(69,022)
(2,088)
914
$ 202,433
(28,982)
$ 173,451

$ 271,017
(69,022)
(2,107)
920
$ 200,808
(29,134)
$ 171,674

$ 268,197
(69,022)
(2,127)
926
$ 197,974
(28,674)
$ 169,300

$ 269,309
(69,022)
(2,146)
929
$ 199,070
(26,444)
$ 172,626

$ 270,883
(69,022)
(2,166)
913
$ 200,608
(24,364)
$ 176,244

$ 275,484
(69,023)
(2,185)
915
$ 205,191
(23,441)
$ 181,750

$ 274,632
(69,023)
(2,212)
915
$ 204,312
(23,684)
$ 180,628

$ 274,047
(68,951)
(2,146)
920
$ 203,870
(24,399)
$ 179,471

Reconciliation of period-end shareholders’ equity to
period-end tangible shareholders’ equity and
period-end tangible common shareholders’ equity
Shareholders’ equity
$ 273,197
Goodwill
(69,022)
Intangible assets (excluding MSRs)
(2,075)
Related deferred tax liabilities
899
Tangible shareholders’ equity
$ 202,999
Preferred stock
(28,397)
Tangible common shareholders’ equity
$ 174,602

$ 269,524
(69,022)
(2,094)
915
$ 199,323
(29,134)
$ 170,189

$ 269,118
(69,022)
(2,114)
920
$ 198,902
(29,134)
$ 169,768

$ 266,617
(69,022)
(2,133)
926
$ 196,388
(27,137)
$ 169,251

$ 270,066
(69,022)
(2,153)
929
$ 199,820
(24,708)
$ 175,112

$ 272,464
(69,023)
(2,172)
913
$ 202,182
(23,441)
$ 178,741

$ 277,119
(69,023)
(2,192)
915
$ 206,819
(23,441)
$ 183,378

$ 274,000
(68,951)
(2,134)
915
$ 203,830
(24,319)
$ 179,511

Reconciliation of period-end assets to period-end
tangible assets
Assets
Goodwill
Intangible assets (excluding MSRs)
Related deferred tax liabilities
Tangible assets

$3,072,953
(69,022)
(2,094)
915
$3,002,752

$3,111,606
(69,022)
(2,114)
920
$3,041,390

$3,238,223
(69,022)
(2,133)
926
$3,167,994

$3,169,495
(69,022)
(2,153)
929
$3,099,249

$3,085,446
(69,023)
(2,172)
913
$3,015,164

$3,029,894
(69,023)
(2,192)
915
$2,959,594

$2,969,992
(68,951)
(2,134)
915
$2,899,822

$3,051,375
(69,022)
(2,075)
899
$2,981,177

Presents reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures. For more information on non-GAAP financial measures and ratios we use in assessing the results of the
Corporation, see Supplemental Financial Data on page 79.

132 Bank of America 2022

Financial Statements and Notes
Table of Contents
Page

Consolidated Statement of Income
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
Consolidated Balance Sheet
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles
Note 2 – Net Interest Income and Noninterest Income
Note 3 – Derivatives
Note 4 – Securities
Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses
Note 6 – Securitizations and Other Variable Interest Entities
Note 7 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Note 8 – Leases
Note 9 – Deposits
Note 10 – Securities Financing Agreements, Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted Cash
Note 11 – Long-term Debt
Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies
Note 13 – Shareholders’ Equity
Note 14 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
Note 15 – Earnings Per Common Share
Note 16 – Regulatory Requirements and Restrictions
Note 17 – Employee Benefit Plans
Note 18 – Stock-based Compensation Plans
Note 19 – Income Taxes
Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements
Note 21 – Fair Value Option
Note 22 – Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Note 23 – Business Segment Information
Note 24 – Parent Company Information
Note 25 – Performance by Geographical Area
Glossary
Acronyms

137
137
138
139
140
141
150
151
158
161
171
175
176
177
177
179
180
184
186
186
187
188
193
193
195
204
206
207
210
212
213
215

Bank of America 2022 133

Report of Management on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries
The management of Bank of America Corporation is responsible
for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting.
The Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding
the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. The Corporation’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of
the assets of the Corporation; (ii) provide reasonable assurance
that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America, and that receipts and expenditures of the Corporation
are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the Corporation; and (iii) provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
Corporation’s assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.

134 Bank of America 2022

Management
assessed
the
effectiveness
of
the
Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2022 based on the framework set forth by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013).
Based on that assessment, management concluded that, as of
December 31, 2022, the Corporation’s internal control over
financial reporting is effective.
The Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as
of
December
31,
2022
has
been
audited
by
PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their accompanying report which
expresses an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the
Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2022.

Brian T. Moynihan
Chair, Chief Executive Officer and President

Alastair M. Borthwick
Chief Financial Officer

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Bank
of America Corporation
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal
Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets of Bank of America Corporation and its subsidiaries (the
“Corporation”) as of December 31, 2022 and 2021, and the
related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive
income, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2022, including the related notes (collectively referred to as the
“consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited the
Corporation's internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2022, based on criteria established in Internal
Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements
referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Corporation as of December 31, 2022
and 2021, and the results of its operations and its cash flows
for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2022 in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion,
the Corporation maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31,
2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.

Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements, the Corporation changed the manner in which it
accounts for credit losses on certain financial instruments in
2020.

Basis for Opinions
The Corporation’s management is responsible for these
consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting,
included in the accompanying Report of Management on Internal
Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express
opinions on the Corporation’s consolidated financial statements
and on the Corporation's internal control over financial reporting
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered
with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with
respect to the Corporation in accordance with the U.S. federal
securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards
of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the consolidated financial statements are free of
material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the
consolidated financial statements included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the
consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or

fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks.
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence
regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated
financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of
the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also
included performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.

Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over
Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding
the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal
control over financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions
and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and
that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of management and
directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that
could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.

Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters
arising from the current period audit of the consolidated
financial statements that were communicated or required to be
communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relate to
accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated
financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging,
subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical
audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the
consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we
are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below,
providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on
the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.

Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses - Commercial and
Consumer Card Loans
As described in Notes 1 and 5 to the consolidated financial
statements, the allowance for loan and lease losses represents
management’s estimate of the expected credit losses in the

Bank of America 2022 135

Corporation’s loan and lease portfolio, excluding loans and
unfunded lending commitments accounted for under the fair
value option. As of December 31, 2022, the allowance for loan
and lease losses was $12.7 billion on total loans and leases of
$1,040.0 billion, which excludes loans accounted for under the
fair value option. For commercial and consumer card loans, the
expected credit loss is typically estimated using quantitative
methods that consider a variety of factors such as historical
loss experience, the current credit quality of the portfolio as well
as an economic outlook over the life of the loan. In its loss
forecasting framework, the Corporation incorporates forward
looking information through the use of macroeconomic
scenarios applied over the forecasted life of the assets. These
macroeconomic scenarios include variables that have
historically been key drivers of increases and decreases in
credit losses. These variables include, but are not limited to,
unemployment rates, real estate prices, gross domestic product
levels and corporate bond spreads. The scenarios that are
chosen and the weighting given to each scenario depend on a
variety of factors including recent economic events, leading
economic indicators, views of internal as well as third-party
economists and industry trends. Also included in the allowance
for loan and lease losses are qualitative reserves to cover
losses that are expected but, in the Corporation's assessment,
may not be adequately reflected in the quantitative methods or
the economic assumptions. Factors that the Corporation
considers include changes in lending policies and procedures,
business conditions, the nature and size of the portfolio,
portfolio concentrations, the volume and severity of past due
loans and nonaccrual loans, the effect of external factors such
as competition, and legal and regulatory requirements, among
others. Further, the Corporation considers the inherent
uncertainty in quantitative models that are built on historical
data.
The principal considerations for our determination that
performing procedures relating to the allowance for loan and
lease losses for the commercial and consumer card portfolios is
a critical audit matter are (i) the significant judgment and
estimation by management in developing lifetime economic
forecast scenarios, related weightings to each scenario and
certain qualitative reserves, which in turn led to a high degree of
auditor judgment, subjectivity and effort in performing
procedures and in evaluating audit evidence obtained, and (ii)
the audit effort involved professionals with specialized skill and
knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and
evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls
relating to the allowance for loan and lease losses, including
controls over the evaluation and approval of models, forecast
scenarios and related weightings, and qualitative reserves.
These procedures also included, among others, testing
management’s process for estimating the allowance for loan
and lease losses, including (i) evaluating the appropriateness of
the loss forecast models and methodology, (ii) evaluating the
reasonableness of certain macroeconomic variables, (iii)
evaluating the reasonableness of management’s development,
selection and weighting of lifetime economic forecast scenarios
used in the loss forecast models, (iv) testing the completeness
and accuracy of data used in the estimate, and (v) evaluating
the reasonableness of certain qualitative reserves made to the

136 Bank of America 2022

model output results to determine the overall allowance for loan
and lease losses. The procedures also included the involvement
of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge to assist
in evaluating the appropriateness of certain loss forecast
models, the reasonableness of economic forecast scenarios
and related weightings and the reasonableness of certain
qualitative reserves.

Valuation of Certain Level 3 Financial Instruments
As described in Notes 1 and 20 to the consolidated financial
statements, the Corporation carries certain financial
instruments at fair value, which includes $10.7 billion of assets
and $7.1 billion of liabilities classified as Level 3 fair value
measurements that are valued on a recurring basis and $3.4
billion of assets classified as Level 3 fair value measurements
that are valued on a nonrecurring basis, for which the
determination of fair value requires significant management
judgment or estimation. The Corporation determines the fair
value of Level 3 financial instruments using pricing models,
discounted cash flow methodologies, or similar techniques that
require inputs that are both unobservable and are significant to
the overall fair value measurement. Unobservable inputs, such
as volatility or implied yield, may be determined using
quantitative-based extrapolations, pricing models or other
internal methodologies which incorporate management
estimates and available market information.
The principal considerations for our determination that
performing procedures relating to the valuation of certain Level
3 financial instruments is a critical audit matter are the
significant judgment and estimation used by management to
determine the fair value of these financial instruments, which in
turn led to a high degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity and
effort in performing procedures and in evaluating audit evidence
obtained, including the involvement of professionals with
specialized skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and
evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These
procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls
relating to the valuation of financial instruments, including
controls related to valuation models, significant unobservable
inputs, and data. These procedures also included, among
others, the involvement of professionals with specialized skill
and knowledge to assist in developing an independent estimate
of fair value for a sample of these certain financial instruments
and comparison of management’s estimate to the
independently developed estimate of fair value. Developing the
independent estimate involved testing the completeness and
accuracy of data provided by management and evaluating the
reasonableness of management’s significant unobservable
inputs.

Charlotte, North Carolina
February 22, 2023
We have served as the Corporation’s auditor since 1958.

Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries

Consolidated Statement of Income
2021

2022

(In millions, except per share information)

Net interest income
Interest income
Interest expense
Net interest income

$

Noninterest income
Fees and commissions
Market making and similar activities
Other income
Total noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense

72,565
20,103
52,462

Per common share information
Earnings
Diluted earnings
Average common shares issued and outstanding
Average diluted common shares issued and outstanding

$
$

$

47,672
4,738
42,934

$

51,585
8,225
43,360

33,212
12,075
(2,799)
42,488
94,950

39,299
8,691
(1,811)
46,179
89,113

34,551
8,355
(738)
42,168
85,528

2,543

(4,594)

11,320

Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Compensation and benefits
Occupancy and equipment
Information processing and communications
Product delivery and transaction related
Professional fees
Marketing
Other general operating
Total noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income
Preferred stock dividends and other
Net income applicable to common shareholders

$

2020

36,447
7,071
6,279
3,653
2,142
1,825
4,021
61,438
30,969
3,441
27,528
1,513
26,015

3.21
3.19
8,113.7
8,167.5

$
$

$

36,140
7,138
5,769
3,881
1,775
1,939
3,089
59,731
33,976
1,998
31,978
1,421
30,557

3.60
3.57
8,493.3
8,558.4

$
$

$

32,725
7,141
5,222
3,433
1,694
1,701
3,297
55,213
18,995
1,101
17,894
1,421
16,473

1.88
1.87
8,753.2
8,796.9

Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
(Dollars in millions)

Net income
Other comprehensive income (loss), net-of-tax:
Net change in debt securities
Net change in debit valuation adjustments
Net change in derivatives
Employee benefit plan adjustments
Net change in foreign currency translation adjustments
Other comprehensive income (loss)
Comprehensive income (loss)

$

$

2022
27,528
(6,028)
755
(10,055)
(667)
(57)
(16,052)
11,476

$

2021
31,978

$

(2,077)
356
(2,306)
624
(45)
(3,448)
28,530

$

2020
17,894

$

4,799
(498)
826
(98)
(52)
4,977
22,871

See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.

Bank of America 2022 137

Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries

Consolidated Balance Sheet
December 31
2021
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Assets
Cash and due from banks
Interest-bearing deposits with the Federal Reserve, non-U.S. central banks and other banks
Cash and cash equivalents
Time deposits placed and other short-term investments
Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell
(includes $146,999 and $150,665 measured at fair value)
Trading account assets (includes $115,505 and $103,434 pledged as collateral)
Derivative assets
Debt securities:
Carried at fair value
Held-to-maturity, at cost (fair value – $524,267 and $665,890)
Total debt securities
Loans and leases (includes $5,771 and $7,819 measured at fair value)
Allowance for loan and lease losses
Loans and leases, net of allowance
Premises and equipment, net
Goodwill
Loans held-for-sale (includes $1,115 and $4,455 measured at fair value)
Customer and other receivables
Other assets (includes $9,594 and $12,144 measured at fair value)
Total assets
Liabilities
Deposits in U.S. offices:
Noninterest-bearing
Interest-bearing (includes $311 and $408 measured at fair value)
Deposits in non-U.S. offices:
Noninterest-bearing
Interest-bearing
Total deposits
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase
(includes $151,708 and $139,641 measured at fair value)
Trading account liabilities
Derivative liabilities
Short-term borrowings (includes $832 and $4,279 measured at fair value)
Accrued expenses and other liabilities (includes $9,752 and $11,489 measured at fair value
and $1,540 and $1,456 of reserve for unfunded lending commitments)
Long-term debt (includes $33,070 and $29,708 measured at fair value)
Total liabilities
Commitments and contingencies (Note 6 – Securitizations and Other Variable Interest Entities
and Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies)
Shareholders’ equity
Preferred stock, $0.01 par value; authorized – 100,000,000 shares; issued and outstanding – 4,088,101 and 3,939,686 shares
Common stock and additional paid-in capital, $0.01 par value; authorized – 12,800,000,000 shares;
issued and outstanding – 7,996,777,943 and 8,077,831,463 shares
Retained earnings
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
Total shareholders’ equity
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
Assets of consolidated variable interest entities included in total assets above (isolated to settle the liabilities of the variable interest entities)
Trading account assets
Loans and leases
Allowance for loan and lease losses
Loans and leases, net of allowance
All other assets

$

$

$

$

$

Total assets of consolidated variable interest entities
Liabilities of consolidated variable interest entities included in total liabilities above

$

Short-term borrowings (includes $42 and $51 of non-recourse short-term borrowings)

$

Long-term debt (includes $4,581 and $3,587 of non-recourse debt)

See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.

138 Bank of America 2022

$

$

29,222
318,999
348,221
7,144

267,574
296,108
48,642

250,720
247,080
35,344

229,994
632,825
862,819
1,045,747
(12,682)
1,033,065
11,510
69,022
6,871
67,543
150,759
3,051,375

308,073
674,554
982,627
979,124
(12,387)
966,737
10,833
69,022
15,635
72,263
163,869
3,169,495

640,745
1,182,590

$

$

784,189
1,165,914

20,480
86,526
1,930,341

27,457
86,886
2,064,446

195,635
80,399
44,816
26,932

192,329
100,690
37,675
23,753

224,073
275,982
2,778,178

200,419
280,117
2,899,429

28,397

24,708

58,953
207,003
(21,156)
273,197
3,051,375

2,816
16,738
(797)
15,941
116
18,873
42

$

$

$
$

13
4,636

62,398
188,064
(5,104)
270,066
3,169,495

5,004
17,135
(958)
16,177
189
21,370
247
3,587

4,581

All other liabilities (includes $13 and $7 of non-recourse liabilities)
Total liabilities of consolidated variable interest entities

30,334
199,869
230,203
7,259

$

7
3,841

Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries

Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity

(In millions)

Balance, December 31, 2019
Cumulative adjustment for adoption of credit loss accounting
standard
Net income
Net change in debt securities
Net change in debit valuation adjustments
Net change in derivatives
Employee benefit plan adjustments
Net change in foreign currency translation adjustments
Dividends declared:
Common
Preferred
Issuance of preferred stock
Redemption of preferred stock
Common stock issued under employee plans, net, and other
Common stock repurchased
Balance, December 31, 2020
Net income
Net change in debt securities
Net change in debit valuation adjustments
Net change in derivatives
Employee benefit plan adjustments
Net change in foreign currency translation adjustments
Dividends declared:
Common
Preferred
Issuance of preferred stock
Redemption of preferred stock
Common stock issued under employee plans, net, and other
Common stock repurchased
Balance, December 31, 2021
Net income
Net change in debt securities
Net change in debit valuation adjustments
Net change in derivatives
Employee benefit plan adjustments
Net change in foreign currency translation adjustments
Dividends declared:
Common
Preferred
Issuance of preferred stock
Redemption of preferred stock
Common stock issued under employee plans, net, and other
Common stock repurchased
Balance, December 31, 2022

Preferred
Stock
$ 23,401

Common Stock and
Additional Paid-in Capital
Shares
Amount
8,836.1 $
91,723

Retained
Earnings
$
156,319

Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Income (Loss)
$
(6,633)

Total
Shareholders’
Equity
$
264,810

(2,406)
17,894

(2,406)
17,894
4,799
(498)
826
(98)
(52)

4,799
(498)
826
(98)
(52)
(6,289)
(1,421)

$

(6,289)
(1,421)
2,181
(1,072)
1,275
(7,025)
272,924
31,978
(2,077)
356
(2,306)
624
(45)

$

(6,028)
755
(10,055)
(667)
(57)

(6,575)
(1,421)
2,169
(1,971)
1,536
(25,126)
270,066
27,528
(6,028)
755
(10,055)
(667)
(57)

(21,156)

(6,963)
(1,596)
4,426
(654)
1,515
(5,073)
273,197

2,181
(1,072)

$

24,510

41.7
(227.0)
8,650.8

$

1,284
(7,025)
85,982

(9)
$

164,088
31,978

$

(1,656)
(2,077)
356
(2,306)
624
(45)

(6,575)
(1,421)
2,169
(1,971)

$

24,708

42.3
(615.3)
8,077.8

$

1,542
(25,126)
62,398

(6)
$

188,064
27,528

$

(5,104)

(6,963)
(1,596)
4,426
(737)

$

28,397

44.9
(125.9)
7,996.8

$

83
1,545
(5,073)
58,953

(30)
$

207,003

$

$

See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.

Bank of America 2022 139

Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries

Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net income
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Provision for credit losses
Gains on sales of debt securities
Depreciation and amortization
Net amortization of premium/discount on debt securities
Deferred income taxes
Stock-based compensation
Loans held-for-sale:
Originations and purchases
Proceeds from sales and paydowns of loans originally classified as held for sale and instruments
from related securitization activities
Net change in:
Trading and derivative assets/liabilities
Other assets
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Other operating activities, net
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
Investing activities
Net change in:
Time deposits placed and other short-term investments
Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell
Debt securities carried at fair value:
Proceeds from sales
Proceeds from paydowns and maturities
Purchases
Held-to-maturity debt securities:
Proceeds from paydowns and maturities
Purchases
Loans and leases:
Proceeds from sales of loans originally classified as held for investment and instruments
from related securitization activities
Purchases
Other changes in loans and leases, net
Other investing activities, net
Net cash used in investing activities
Financing activities
Net change in:
Deposits
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase
Short-term borrowings
Long-term debt:
Proceeds from issuance
Retirement
Preferred stock:
Proceeds from issuance
Redemption
Common stock repurchased
Cash dividends paid
Other financing activities, net
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
Supplemental cash flow disclosures
Interest paid
Income taxes paid, net

$

$
$

See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.

140 Bank of America 2022

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

27,528

$

31,978

2020
$

17,894

2,543
(32)
1,978
2,072
739
2,862

(4,594)
(22)
1,898
5,837
(838)
2,768

11,320
(411)
1,843
4,101
(1,737)
2,031

(24,862)

(43,635)

(19,657)

31,567

34,684

19,049

(95,772)
20,799
23,029
1,222
(6,327)

(22,104)
(34,455)
16,639
4,651
(7,193)

16,942
(12,883)
(4,385)
3,886
37,993

(115)
(16,854)

(598)
53,338

561
(29,461)

69,114
110,195
(134,962)

6,893
159,616
(238,398)

77,524
91,084
(194,877)

63,852
(24,096)

124,880
(362,736)

93,835
(257,535)

26,757
(5,798)
(86,010)
(4,612)
(2,529)

10,396
(5,164)
(58,039)
(3,479)
(313,291)

13,351
(5,229)
36,571
(3,489)
(177,665)

(134,190)
3,306
3,179

268,966
22,006
4,432

360,677
5,214
(4,893)

65,910
(34,055)

76,675
(46,826)

57,013
(47,948)

4,426
(654)
(5,073)
(8,576)
(312)
(106,039)
(3,123)
(118,018)
348,221
230,203

2,169
(1,971)
(25,126)
(8,055)
(620)
291,650
(3,408)
(32,242)
380,463
348,221

2,181
(1,072)
(7,025)
(7,727)
(601)
355,819
2,756
218,903
161,560
380,463

18,526
2,288

$
$

4,506
2,760

$
$

8,662
2,894

Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries

Significant Accounting Principles

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Cash and Cash Equivalents

NOTE 1 Summary of Significant Accounting
Principles
Bank of America Corporation, a bank holding company and a
financial holding company, provides a diverse range of financial
services and products throughout the U.S. and in certain
international markets. The term “the Corporation” as used
herein may refer to Bank of America Corporation, individually,
Bank of America Corporation and its subsidiaries, or certain of
Bank of America Corporation’s subsidiaries or affiliates.

Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand, cash items in
the process of collection, cash segregated under federal and
other brokerage regulations, and amounts due from
correspondent banks, the Federal Reserve Bank and certain
non-U.S. central banks. Certain cash balances are restricted as
to withdrawal or usage by legally binding contractual agreements
or regulatory requirements.

Securities Financing Agreements

The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of
the Corporation and its majority-owned subsidiaries and those
variable interest entities (VIEs) where the Corporation is the
primary beneficiary. Intercompany accounts and transactions
have been eliminated. Results of operations of acquired
companies are included from the dates of acquisition, and for
VIEs, from the dates that the Corporation became the primary
beneficiary. Assets held in an agency or fiduciary capacity are
not included in the Consolidated Financial Statements. The
Corporation accounts for investments in companies for which it
owns a voting interest and for which it has the ability to exercise
significant influence over operating and financing decisions
using the equity method of accounting. These investments,
which include the Corporation’s interests in affordable housing
and renewable energy partnerships, are recorded in other
assets. Equity method investments are subject to impairment
testing, and the Corporation’s proportionate share of income or
loss is included in other income.
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and
disclosures. Actual results could materially differ from those
estimates and assumptions. Certain prior-period amounts have
been reclassified to conform to current period presentation.

Securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell
and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase
(securities financing agreements) are treated as collateralized
financing transactions except in instances where the transaction
is required to be accounted for as individual sale and purchase
transactions. Generally, these agreements are recorded at
acquisition or sale price plus accrued interest. In instances
where the interest is negative, the Corporation’s policy is to
present negative interest on financial assets as interest income
and negative interest on financial liabilities as interest expense.
For securities financing agreements that are accounted for
under the fair value option, the changes in the fair value of
these securities financing agreements are recorded in market
making and similar activities in the Consolidated Statement of
Income.
The Corporation’s policy is to monitor the market value of
the principal amount loaned under resale agreements and
obtain collateral from or return collateral pledged to
counterparties
when
appropriate.
Securities
financing
agreements do not create material credit risk due to these
collateral provisions; therefore, an allowance for loan losses is
not necessary.
In transactions where the Corporation acts as the lender in a
securities lending agreement and receives securities that can
be pledged or sold as collateral, it recognizes an asset on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair value, representing the
securities received, and a liability, representing the obligation to
return those securities.

New Accounting Standards

Trading Instruments

Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation

Hedge Accounting
The FASB issued a new accounting standard that makes
targeted improvements to the application of the fair value hedge
accounting guidance for closed portfolios of financial assets.
The targeted improvements were effective January 1, 2023 on a
prospective basis.

Financial Instruments – Credit Losses
The FASB amended the accounting and disclosure requirements
for expected credit losses (ECL) by removing the recognition and
measurement guidance on troubled debt restructurings (TDRs)
and adding disclosures on the financial effect and subsequent
performance of certain types of modifications made to
borrowers experiencing financial difficulties. The effects of these
changes on the Corporation’s consolidated financial position,
results of operations or disclosures in the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements are not significant. The
amendments were effective on January 1, 2023, which the
Corporation adopted using a modified retrospective approach.

Financial instruments utilized in trading activities are carried at
fair value. Fair value is generally based on quoted market prices
for the same or similar assets and liabilities. If these market
prices are not available, fair values are estimated based on
dealer quotes, pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies, or similar techniques where the determination
of fair value may require significant management judgment or
estimation. Realized gains and losses are recorded on a tradedate basis. Realized and unrealized gains and losses are
recognized in market making and similar activities.

Derivatives and Hedging Activities
Derivatives are entered into on behalf of customers, for trading
or to support risk management activities. Derivatives used in
risk management activities include derivatives that are both
designated in qualifying accounting hedge relationships and
derivatives used to hedge market risks in relationships that are
not designated in qualifying accounting hedge relationships
(referred to as other risk management activities). The
Corporation manages interest rate and foreign currency
exchange rate sensitivity predominantly through the use of
derivatives. Derivatives utilized by the Corporation include
swaps, futures and forward settlement contracts, and option
contracts.
Bank of America 2022 141

All derivatives are recorded on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet at fair value, taking into consideration the effects of
legally enforceable master netting agreements that allow the
Corporation to settle positive and negative positions and offset
cash collateral held with the same counterparty on a net basis.
For exchange-traded contracts, fair value is based on quoted
market prices in active or inactive markets or is derived from
observable market-based pricing parameters, similar to those
applied to over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. For non-exchange
traded contracts, fair value is based on dealer quotes, pricing
models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar
techniques for which the determination of fair value may require
significant management judgment or estimation.
Valuations of derivative assets and liabilities reflect the
value of the instrument including counterparty credit risk. These
values also take into account the Corporation’s own credit
standing.

Trading Derivatives and Other Risk Management Activities
Derivatives held for trading purposes are included in derivative
assets or derivative liabilities on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet with changes in fair value included in market making and
similar activities.
Derivatives used for other risk management activities are
included in derivative assets or derivative liabilities. Derivatives
used in other risk management activities have not been
designated in qualifying accounting hedge relationships because
they did not qualify or the risk that is being mitigated pertains to
an item that is reported at fair value through earnings so that
the effect of measuring the derivative instrument and the asset
or liability to which the risk exposure pertains will offset in the
Consolidated Statement of Income to the extent effective. The
changes in the fair value of derivatives that serve to mitigate
certain risks associated with mortgage servicing rights (MSRs),
interest rate lock commitments (IRLCs) and first-lien mortgage
loans held-for-sale (LHFS) that are originated by the Corporation
are recorded in other income. Changes in the fair value of
derivatives that serve to mitigate interest rate risk and foreign
currency risk are included in market making and similar
activities. Credit derivatives are also used by the Corporation to
mitigate the risk associated with various credit exposures. The
changes in the fair value of these derivatives are included in
market making and similar activities and other income.

Derivatives Used For Hedge Accounting Purposes
(Accounting Hedges)
For accounting hedges, the Corporation formally documents at
inception all relationships between hedging instruments and
hedged items, as well as the risk management objectives and
strategies for undertaking various accounting hedges.
Additionally, the Corporation primarily uses regression analysis
at the inception of a hedge and for each reporting period
thereafter to assess whether the derivative used in an
accounting hedge transaction is expected to be and has been
highly effective in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash
flows of a hedged item or forecasted transaction. The
Corporation discontinues hedge accounting when it is
determined that a derivative is not expected to be or has
ceased to be highly effective as a hedge, and then reflects
changes in fair value of the derivative in earnings after
termination of the hedge relationship.
Fair value hedges are used to protect against changes in the
fair value of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities that are
attributable to interest rate or foreign exchange volatility.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives designated as fair value

142 Bank of America 2022

hedges are recorded in earnings, together and in the same
income statement line item with changes in the fair value of the
related hedged item. If a derivative instrument in a fair value
hedge is terminated or the hedge designation removed, the
previous adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged asset
or liability are subsequently accounted for in the same manner
as other components of the carrying value of that asset or
liability. For interest-earning assets and interest-bearing
liabilities, such adjustments are amortized to earnings over the
remaining life of the respective asset or liability.
Cash flow hedges are used primarily to minimize the
variability in cash flows of assets and liabilities or forecasted
transactions caused by interest rate or foreign exchange rate
fluctuations. The Corporation also uses cash flow hedges to
hedge the price risk associated with deferred compensation.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives used in cash flow
hedges are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive
income (OCI) and are reclassified into the line item in the
income statement in which the hedged item is recorded in the
same period the hedged item affects earnings. Components of
a derivative that are excluded in assessing hedge effectiveness
are recorded in the same income statement line item as the
hedged item.
Net investment hedges are used to manage the foreign
exchange rate sensitivity arising from a net investment in a
foreign operation. Changes in the spot prices of derivatives that
are designated as net investment hedges of foreign operations
are recorded as a component of accumulated OCI. The
remaining components of these derivatives are excluded in
assessing hedge effectiveness and are recorded in market
making and similar activities.

Securities
Debt securities are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet
at their trade date. Their classification is dependent on the
purpose for which the securities were acquired. Debt securities
purchased for use in the Corporation’s trading activities are
reported in trading account assets at fair value with unrealized
gains and losses included in market making and similar
activities. Substantially all other debt securities purchased are
used in the Corporation’s asset and liability management (ALM)
activities and are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet
as either debt securities carried at fair value or as held-tomaturity (HTM) debt securities. Debt securities carried at fair
value are either available-for-sale (AFS) securities with
unrealized gains and losses net-of-tax included in accumulated
OCI or carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses
reported in market making and similar activities. HTM debt
securities are debt securities that management has the intent
and ability to hold to maturity and are reported at amortized
cost.
The Corporation evaluates each AFS security where the value
has declined below amortized cost. If the Corporation intends to
sell or believes it is more likely than not that it will be required
to sell the debt security, it is written down to fair value through
earnings. For AFS debt securities the Corporation intends to
hold, the Corporation evaluates the debt securities for ECL,
except for debt securities that are guaranteed by the U.S.
Treasury, U.S. government agencies or sovereign entities of high
credit quality where the Corporation applies a zero credit loss
assumption. For the remaining AFS debt securities, the
Corporation considers qualitative parameters such as internal
and external credit ratings and the value of underlying collateral.
If an AFS debt security fails any of the qualitative parameters, a
discounted cash flow analysis is used by the Corporation to

determine if a portion of the unrealized loss is a result of an
ECL. The Corporation will then recognize either credit loss
expense or a reversal of credit loss expense in other income for
the amount necessary to adjust the debt securities valuation
allowance to its current estimate of expected credit losses.
Cash flows expected to be collected are estimated using all
relevant information available such as remaining payment
terms, prepayment speeds, the financial condition of the issuer,
expected defaults and the value of the underlying collateral. If
any of the decline in fair value is related to market factors, that
amount is recognized in accumulated OCI. In certain instances,
the credit loss may exceed the total decline in fair value, in
which case, the allowance recorded is limited to the difference
between the amortized cost and the fair value of the asset.
The Corporation separately evaluates its HTM debt securities
for any credit losses, of which substantially all qualify for the
zero loss assumption. For the remaining securities, the
Corporation performs a discounted cash flow analysis to
estimate any credit losses which are then recognized as part of
the allowance for credit losses.
Interest on debt securities, including amortization of
premiums and accretion of discounts, is included in interest
income. Premiums and discounts are amortized or accreted to
interest income at a constant effective yield over the contractual
lives of the securities. Realized gains and losses from the sales
of debt securities are determined using the specific
identification method.
Equity securities with readily determinable fair values that
are not held for trading purposes are carried at fair value with
unrealized gains and losses included in other income. Equity
securities that do not have readily determinable fair values are
recorded at cost less impairment, if any, plus or minus
qualifying observable price changes. These securities are
reported in other assets.

Loans and Leases
Loans, with the exception of loans accounted for under the fair
value option, are measured at historical cost and reported at
their outstanding principal balances net of any unearned
income, charge-offs, unamortized deferred fees and costs on
originated loans, and for purchased loans, net of any
unamortized premiums or discounts. Loan origination fees and
certain direct origination costs are deferred and recognized as
adjustments to interest income over the lives of the related
loans. Unearned income, discounts and premiums are
amortized to interest income using a level yield methodology.
The Corporation elects to account for certain consumer and
commercial loans under the fair value option with interest
reported in interest income and changes in fair value reported in
market making and similar activities or other income.
Under applicable accounting guidance, for reporting
purposes, the loan and lease portfolio is categorized by portfolio
segment and, within each portfolio segment, by class of
financing receivable. A portfolio segment is defined as the level
at which an entity develops and documents a systematic
methodology to determine the allowance for credit losses, and a
class of financing receivable is defined as the level of
disaggregation of portfolio segments based on the initial
measurement attribute, risk characteristics and methods for
assessing risk. The Corporation’s three portfolio segments are
Consumer Real Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and
Commercial. The classes within the Consumer Real Estate
portfolio segment are residential mortgage and home equity.
The classes within the Credit Card and Other Consumer portfolio
segment are credit card, direct/indirect consumer and other

consumer. The classes within the Commercial portfolio segment
are U.S. commercial, non-U.S. commercial, commercial real
estate, commercial lease financing and U.S. small business
commercial.

Leases
The Corporation provides equipment financing to its customers
through a variety of lessor arrangements. Direct financing
leases and sales-type leases are carried at the aggregate of
lease payments receivable plus the estimated residual value of
the leased property less unearned income, which is accreted to
interest income over the lease terms using methods that
approximate the interest method. Operating lease income is
recognized on a straight-line basis. The Corporation's lease
arrangements generally do not contain non-lease components.

Allowance for Credit Losses
On January 1, 2020, the Corporation adopted the new
accounting standard that requires the measurement of the
allowance for credit losses, which includes both the allowance
for loan and lease losses and the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments, to be based on management’s best estimate of
the ECL in the Corporation’s loan and lease portfolio, excluding
loans and unfunded lending commitments accounted for under
the fair value option. Upon adoption, a $3.3 billion, or 32
percent, increase in the allowance for credit losses was
recorded on January 1, 2020, which was comprised of a net
increase of $2.9 billion in the allowance for loan and lease
losses and a $310 million increase in the reserve for unfunded
lending commitments. The ECL on funded consumer and
commercial loans and leases is referred to as the allowance for
loan and lease losses and is reported separately as a contraasset to loans and leases on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The ECL for unfunded lending commitments, including home
equity lines of credit (HELOCs), standby letters of credit (SBLCs)
and binding unfunded loan commitments is reported on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet in accrued expenses and other
liabilities. The provision for credit losses related to the loan and
lease portfolio and unfunded lending commitments is reported
in the Consolidated Statement of Income at the amount
necessary to adjust the allowance for credit losses to the
current estimate of ECL.
For loans and leases, the ECL is typically estimated using
quantitative methods that consider a variety of factors such as
historical loss experience, the current credit quality of the
portfolio as well as an economic outlook over the life of the
loan. The life of the loan for closed-ended products is based on
the contractual maturity of the loan adjusted for any expected
prepayments. The contractual maturity includes any extension
options that are at the sole discretion of the borrower. For openended products (e.g., lines of credit), the ECL is determined
based on the maximum repayment term associated with future
draws from credit lines unless those lines of credit are
unconditionally cancellable (e.g., credit cards) in which case the
Corporation does not record any allowance.
In its loss forecasting framework, the Corporation
incorporates forward-looking information through the use of
macroeconomic scenarios applied over the forecasted life of the
assets. These macroeconomic scenarios include variables that
have historically been key drivers of increases and decreases in
credit losses. These variables include, but are not limited to,
unemployment rates, real estate prices, gross domestic product
levels and corporate bond spreads. As any one economic
outlook is inherently uncertain, the Corporation leverages
multiple scenarios. The scenarios that are chosen each quarter

Bank of America 2022 143

and the weighting given to each scenario depend on a variety of
factors including recent economic events, leading economic
indicators, views of internal and third-party economists and
industry trends.
The estimate of credit losses includes expected recoveries
of amounts previously charged off (i.e., negative allowance). If a
loan has been charged off, the expected cash flows on the loan
are not limited by the current amortized cost balance. Instead,
expected cash flows can be assumed up to the unpaid principal
balance immediately prior to the charge-off.
The allowance for loan and lease losses for TDRs is
measured based on the present value of projected future
lifetime principal and interest cash flows discounted at the
loan’s original effective interest rate, or in cases where
foreclosure is probable or the loan is collateral dependent, at
the loan’s collateral value or its observable market price, if
available. The measurement of ECL for the renegotiated
consumer credit card TDR portfolio is based on the present
value of projected cash flows discounted using the average TDR
portfolio contractual interest rate, excluding promotionally priced
loans, in effect prior to restructuring. Projected cash flows for
TDRs use the same economic outlook as discussed above. For
purposes of computing this specific loss component of the
allowance, larger impaired loans are evaluated individually and
smaller impaired loans are evaluated as a pool.
Also included in the allowance for loan and lease losses are
qualitative reserves to cover losses that are expected but, in the
Corporation's assessment, may not be adequately reflected in
the quantitative methods or the economic assumptions
described above. For example, factors that the Corporation
considers include changes in lending policies and procedures,
business conditions, the nature and size of the portfolio,
portfolio concentrations, the volume and severity of past due
loans and nonaccrual loans, the effect of external factors such
as competition, and legal and regulatory requirements, among
others. Further, the Corporation considers the inherent
uncertainty in quantitative models that are built on historical
data.
With the exception of the Corporation's credit card portfolio,
the Corporation does not include reserves for interest receivable
in the measurement of the allowance for credit losses as the
Corporation generally classifies consumer loans as
nonperforming at 90 days past due and reverses interest
income for these loans at that time. For credit card loans, the
Corporation reserves for interest and fees as part of the
allowance for loan and lease losses. Upon charge-off of a credit
card loan, the Corporation reverses the interest and fee income
against the income statement line item where it was originally
recorded.
The Corporation has identified the following three portfolio
segments and measures the allowance for credit losses using
the following methods.

Consumer Real Estate
To estimate ECL for consumer loans secured by residential real
estate, the Corporation estimates the number of loans that will
default over the life of the existing portfolio, after factoring in
estimated
prepayments,
using
quantitative
modeling
methodologies. The attributes that are most significant in
estimating the Corporation’s ECL include refreshed loan-to-value
(LTV) or, in the case of a subordinated lien, refreshed combined
LTV (CLTV), borrower credit score, months since origination and
geography, all of which are further broken down by present
collection status (whether the loan is current, delinquent, in
default, or in bankruptcy). The estimates are based on the

144 Bank of America 2022

Corporation’s historical experience with the loan portfolio,
adjusted to reflect the economic outlook. The outlook on the
unemployment rate and consumer real estate prices are key
factors that impact the frequency and severity of loss estimates.
The Corporation does not reserve for credit losses on the
unpaid principal balance of loans insured by the Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) and long-term standby loans, as
these loans are fully insured. The Corporation records a reserve
for unfunded lending commitments for the ECL associated with
the undrawn portion of the Corporation’s HELOCs, which can
only be canceled by the Corporation if certain criteria are met.
The ECL associated with these unfunded lending commitments
is calculated using the same models and methodologies noted
above and incorporate utilization assumptions at time of
default.
For loans that are more than 180 days past due and
collateral-dependent TDRs, the Corporation bases the allowance
on the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral as of the
reporting date less costs to sell. The fair value of the collateral
securing these loans is generally determined using an
automated valuation model (AVM) that estimates the value of a
property by reference to market data including sales of
comparable properties and price trends specific to the
Metropolitan Statistical Area in which the property being valued
is located. In the event that an AVM value is not available, the
Corporation utilizes publicized indices or if these methods
provide less reliable valuations, the Corporation uses appraisals
or broker price opinions to estimate the fair value of the
collateral. While there is inherent imprecision in these
valuations, the Corporation believes that they are representative
of this portfolio in the aggregate.
For loans that are more than 180 days past due and
collateral-dependent TDRs, with the exception of the
Corporation’s fully insured portfolio, the outstanding balance of
loans that is in excess of the estimated property value after
adjusting for costs to sell is charged off. If the estimated
property value decreases in periods subsequent to the initial
charge-off, the Corporation will record an additional charge-off;
however, if the value increases in periods subsequent to the
charge-off, the Corporation will adjust the allowance to account
for the increase but not to a level above the cumulative chargeoff amount.

Credit Cards and Other Consumer
Credit cards are revolving lines of credit without a defined
maturity date. The estimated life of a credit card receivable is
determined by estimating the amount and timing of expected
future payments (e.g., borrowers making full payments,
minimum payments or somewhere in between) that it will take
for a receivable balance to pay off. The ECL on the future
payments incorporates the spending behavior of a borrower
through time using key borrower-specific factors and the
economic outlook described above. The Corporation applies all
expected payments in accordance with the Credit Card
Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (i.e.,
paying down the highest interest rate bucket first). Then
forecasted future payments are prioritized to pay off the oldest
balance until it is brought to zero or an expected charge-off
amount. Unemployment rate outlook, borrower credit score,
delinquency status and historical payment behavior are all key
inputs into the credit card receivable loss forecasting model.
Future draws on the credit card lines are excluded from the ECL
as they are unconditionally cancellable.
The ECL for the consumer vehicle lending portfolio is also
determined using quantitative methods supplemented with

qualitative analysis. The quantitative model estimates ECL
giving consideration to key borrower and loan characteristics
such as delinquency status, borrower credit score, LTV ratio,
underlying collateral type and collateral value.

Commercial
The ECL on commercial loans is forecasted using models that
estimate credit losses over the loan’s contractual life at an
individual loan level. The models use the contractual terms to
forecast future principal cash flows while also considering
expected prepayments. For open-ended commitments such as
revolving lines of credit, changes in funded balance are captured
by forecasting a borrower’s draw and payment behavior over the
remaining life of the commitment. For loans collateralized with
commercial real estate and for which the underlying asset is the
primary source of repayment, the loss forecasting models
consider key loan and customer attributes such as LTV ratio,
net operating income and debt service coverage, and captures
variations in behavior according to property type and region. The
outlook on the unemployment rate, gross domestic product, and
forecasted real estate prices are utilized to determine indicators
such as rent levels and vacancy rates, which impact the ECL
estimate. For all other commercial loans and leases, the loss
forecasting model determines the probabilities of transition to
different credit risk ratings or default at each point over the life
of the asset based on the borrower’s current credit risk rating,
industry sector, size of the exposure and the geographic market.
The severity of loss is determined based on the type of
collateral securing the exposure, the size of the exposure, the
borrower’s industry sector, any guarantors and the geographic
market. Assumptions of expected loss are conditioned to the
economic outlook, and the model considers key economic
variables such as unemployment rate, gross domestic product,
corporate bond spreads, real estate and other asset prices and
equity market returns.
In addition to the allowance for loan and lease losses, the
Corporation also estimates ECL related to unfunded lending
commitments such as letters of credit, financial guarantees,
unfunded bankers acceptances and binding loan commitments,
excluding commitments accounted for under the fair value
option. Reserves are estimated for the unfunded exposure using
the same models and methodologies as the funded exposure
and are reported as reserves for unfunded lending
commitments.

Nonperforming Loans and Leases, Charge-offs and
Delinquencies
Nonperforming loans and leases generally include loans and
leases that have been placed on nonaccrual status. Loans
accounted for under the fair value option and LHFS are not
reported as nonperforming. When a nonaccrual loan is deemed
uncollectible, it is charged off against the allowance for credit
losses. If the charged-off amount is later recovered, the amount
is reversed through the allowance for credit losses at the
recovery date. Charge-offs are reported net of recoveries (net
charge-offs). If recoveries for the period are greater than chargeoffs, net charge-offs are reported as a negative amount.
In accordance with the Corporation’s policies, consumer real
estate-secured loans, including residential mortgages and home
equity loans, are generally placed on nonaccrual status and
classified as nonperforming at 90 days past due unless
repayment of the loan is insured by the FHA or through
individually insured long-term standby agreements with Fannie
Mae (FNMA) or Freddie Mac (FHLMC) (the fully-insured portfolio).
Residential mortgage loans in the fully-insured portfolio are not

placed on nonaccrual status and, therefore, are not reported as
nonperforming. Junior-lien home equity loans are placed on
nonaccrual status and classified as nonperforming when the
underlying first-lien mortgage loan becomes 90 days past due
even if the junior-lien loan is current. The outstanding balance of
real estate-secured loans that is in excess of the estimated
property value less costs to sell is charged off no later than the
end of the month in which the loan becomes 180 days past due
unless the loan is fully insured, or for loans in bankruptcy, within
60 days of receipt of notification of filing, with the remaining
balance classified as nonperforming.
Credit card and other unsecured consumer loans are
charged off when the loan becomes 180 days past due, within
60 days after receipt of notification of death or bankruptcy or
upon confirmation of fraud. These loans continue to accrue
interest until they are charged off and, therefore, are not
reported as nonperforming loans. Consumer vehicle loans are
placed on nonaccrual status when they become 90 days past
due, within 60 days after receipt of notification of bankruptcy or
death or upon confirmation of fraud. These loans are charged
off to their collateral values when the loans become 120 days
past due, upon repossession of the collateral, within 60 days
after receipt of notification of bankruptcy or death or upon
confirmation of fraud. If repossession of the collateral is not
expected, the loans are fully charged off.
Commercial loans and leases, excluding business card
loans, that are past due 90 days or more as to principal or
interest, or where reasonable doubt exists as to timely
collection, including loans that are individually identified as
being impaired, are generally placed on nonaccrual status and
classified as nonperforming unless well-secured and in the
process of collection.
Business card loans are charged off in the same manner as
consumer credit card loans. Other commercial loans and leases
are generally charged off when all or a portion of the principal
amount is determined to be uncollectible.
The entire balance of a consumer loan or commercial loan or
lease is contractually delinquent if the minimum payment is not
received by the specified due date on the customer’s billing
statement. Interest and fees continue to accrue on past due
loans and leases until the date the loan is placed on nonaccrual
status, if applicable. Accrued interest receivable is reversed
when loans and leases are placed on nonaccrual status.
Interest collections on nonaccruing loans and leases for which
the ultimate collectability of principal is uncertain are applied as
principal reductions; otherwise, such collections are credited to
income when received. Loans and leases may be restored to
accrual status when all principal and interest is current and full
repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest is
expected.

Troubled Debt Restructurings
Consumer and commercial loans and leases whose contractual
terms have been restructured in a manner that grants a
concession to a borrower experiencing financial difficulties are
classified as TDRs. Concessions could include a reduction in
the interest rate to a rate that is below market on the loan,
payment extensions, forgiveness of principal, forbearance or
other actions designed to maximize collections. Loans that are
carried at fair value and LHFS are not classified as TDRs.
Loans and leases whose contractual terms have been
modified in a TDR and are current at the time of restructuring
may remain on accrual status if there is demonstrated
performance prior to the restructuring and payment in full under
the restructured terms is expected. Otherwise, the loans are

Bank of America 2022 145

placed on nonaccrual status and reported as nonperforming,
except for fully-insured consumer real estate loans, until there is
sustained repayment performance for a reasonable period,
generally six months. If accruing TDRs cease to perform in
accordance with their modified contractual terms, they are
placed on nonaccrual status and reported as nonperforming
TDRs.
Secured consumer loans that have been discharged in
Chapter 7 bankruptcy and have not been reaffirmed by the
borrower are classified as TDRs at the time of discharge. Such
loans are placed on nonaccrual status and written down to the
estimated collateral value less costs to sell no later than at the
time of discharge. If these loans are contractually current,
interest collections are generally recorded in interest income on
a cash basis. Consumer real estate-secured loans for which a
binding offer to restructure has been extended are also
classified as TDRs. Credit card and other unsecured consumer
loans that have been renegotiated in a TDR generally remain on
accrual status until the loan is either paid in full or charged off,
which occurs no later than the end of the month in which the
loan becomes 180 days past due or, for loans that have been
placed on a fixed payment plan, 120 days past due.
A loan that had previously been modified in a TDR and is
subsequently refinanced under current underwriting standards at
a market rate with no concessionary terms is accounted for as a
new loan and is no longer reported as a TDR.

Loans Held-for-sale
Loans that the Corporation intends to sell in the foreseeable
future, including residential mortgages, loan syndications, and
to a lesser degree, commercial real estate, consumer finance
and other loans, are reported as LHFS and are carried at the
lower of aggregate cost or fair value. The Corporation accounts
for certain LHFS, including residential mortgage LHFS, under the
fair value option. Loan origination costs for LHFS carried at the
lower of cost or fair value are capitalized as part of the carrying
value of the loans and, upon the sale of a loan, are recognized
as part of the gain or loss in noninterest income. LHFS that are
on nonaccrual status and are reported as nonperforming, as
defined in the policy herein, are reported separately from
nonperforming loans and leases.

Premises and Equipment
Premises and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated
depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization
are recognized using the straight-line method over the estimated
useful lives of the assets. Estimated lives range up to 40 years
for buildings, up to 12 years for furniture and equipment, and
the shorter of lease term or estimated useful life for leasehold
improvements.

Other Assets
For the Corporation’s financial assets that are measured at
amortized cost and are not included in debt securities or loans
and leases on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the Corporation
evaluates these assets for ECL using various techniques. For
assets that are subject to collateral maintenance provisions,
including federal funds sold and securities borrowed or
purchased under agreements to resell, where the collateral
consists of daily margining of liquid and marketable assets
where the margining is expected to be maintained into the
foreseeable future, the expected losses are assumed to be
zero. For all other assets, the Corporation performs qualitative
analyses, including consideration of historical losses and
current economic conditions, to estimate any ECL which are

146 Bank of America 2022

then included in a valuation account that is recorded as a
contra-asset against the amortized cost basis of the financial
asset.

Lessee Arrangements
Substantially all of the Corporation’s lessee arrangements are
operating leases. Under these arrangements, the Corporation
records right-of-use assets and lease liabilities at lease
commencement. Right-of-use assets are reported in other
assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and the related
lease liabilities are reported in accrued expenses and other
liabilities. All leases are recorded on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet except leases with an initial term less than 12 months for
which the Corporation made the short-term lease election.
Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
lease term and is recorded in occupancy and equipment
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
The Corporation made an accounting policy election not to
separate lease and non-lease components of a contract that is
or contains a lease for its real estate and equipment leases. As
such, lease payments represent payments on both lease and
non-lease components. At lease commencement, lease
liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the
remaining lease payments and discounted using the
Corporation’s incremental borrowing rate. Right-of-use assets
initially equal the lease liability, adjusted for any lease payments
made prior to lease commencement and for any lease
incentives.

Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is the purchase premium after adjusting for the fair
value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized but is
reviewed for potential impairment on an annual basis, or when
events or circumstances indicate a potential impairment, at the
reporting unit level. A reporting unit is a business segment or
one level below a business segment.
The Corporation assesses the fair value of each reporting
unit against its carrying value, including goodwill, as measured
by allocated equity. For purposes of goodwill impairment testing,
the Corporation utilizes allocated equity as a proxy for the
carrying value of its reporting units. Allocated equity in the
reporting units is comprised of allocated capital plus capital for
the portion of goodwill and intangibles specifically assigned to
the reporting unit.
In performing its goodwill impairment testing, the
Corporation first assesses qualitative factors to determine
whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a
reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors
include, among other things, macroeconomic conditions,
industry and market considerations, financial performance of
the respective reporting unit and other relevant entity- and
reporting-unit specific considerations.
If the Corporation concludes it is more likely than not that
the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a
quantitative assessment is performed. The Corporation has an
unconditional option to bypass the qualitative assessment for
any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to
performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The
Corporation may resume performing the qualitative assessment
in any subsequent period.
When performing the quantitative assessment, if the fair
value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill of
the reporting unit would not be considered impaired. If the
carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a
goodwill impairment loss would be recognized for the amount by

which the reporting unit’s allocated equity exceeds its fair value.
An impairment loss recognized cannot exceed the amount of
goodwill assigned to a reporting unit. An impairment loss
establishes a new basis in the goodwill, and subsequent
reversals of goodwill impairment losses are not permitted under
applicable accounting guidance.
For intangible assets subject to amortization, an impairment
loss is recognized if the carrying value of the intangible asset is
not recoverable and exceeds fair value. The carrying value of the
intangible asset is considered not recoverable if it exceeds the
sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the
use of the asset. Intangible assets deemed to have indefinite
useful lives are not subject to amortization. An impairment loss
is recognized if the carrying value of the intangible asset with an
indefinite life exceeds its fair value.

Variable Interest Entities
A VIE is an entity that lacks equity investors or whose equity
investors do not have a controlling financial interest in the entity
through their equity investments. The Corporation consolidates
a VIE if it has both the power to direct the activities of the VIE
that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance
and an obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive
benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE. On a
quarterly basis, the Corporation reassesses its involvement with
the VIE and evaluates the impact of changes in governing
documents and its financial interests in the VIE. The
consolidation status of the VIEs with which the Corporation is
involved may change as a result of such reassessments.
The Corporation primarily uses VIEs for its securitization
activities, in which the Corporation transfers whole loans or debt
securities into a trust or other vehicle. When the Corporation is
the servicer of whole loans held in a securitization trust,
including non-agency residential mortgages, home equity loans,
credit cards, and other loans, the Corporation has the power to
direct the most significant activities of the trust. The Corporation
generally does not have the power to direct the most significant
activities of a residential mortgage agency trust except in certain
circumstances in which the Corporation holds substantially all of
the issued securities and has the unilateral right to liquidate the
trust. The power to direct the most significant activities of a
commercial mortgage securitization trust is typically held by the
special servicer or by the party holding specific subordinate
securities which embody certain controlling rights. The
Corporation consolidates a whole-loan securitization trust if it
has the power to direct the most significant activities and also
holds securities issued by the trust or has other contractual
arrangements, other than standard representations and
warranties, that could potentially be significant to the trust.
The Corporation may also transfer trading account securities
and AFS securities into municipal bond or resecuritization
trusts. The Corporation consolidates a municipal bond or
resecuritization trust if it has control over the ongoing activities
of the trust such as the remarketing of the trust’s liabilities or, if
there are no ongoing activities, sole discretion over the design
of the trust, including the identification of securities to be
transferred in and the structure of securities to be issued, and
also retains securities or has liquidity or other commitments
that could potentially be significant to the trust. The Corporation
does not consolidate a municipal bond or resecuritization trust if
one or a limited number of third-party investors share
responsibility for the design of the trust or have control over the
significant activities of the trust through liquidation or other
substantive rights.

Other VIEs used by the Corporation include collateralized
debt obligations (CDOs), investment vehicles created on behalf
of customers and other investment vehicles. The Corporation
does not routinely serve as collateral manager for CDOs and,
therefore, does not typically have the power to direct the
activities that most significantly impact the economic
performance of a CDO. However, following an event of default, if
the Corporation is a majority holder of senior securities issued
by a CDO and acquires the power to manage its assets, the
Corporation consolidates the CDO.
The Corporation consolidates a customer or other
investment vehicle if it has control over the initial design of the
vehicle or manages the assets in the vehicle and also absorbs
potentially significant gains or losses through an investment in
the vehicle, derivative contracts or other arrangements. The
Corporation does not consolidate an investment vehicle if a
single investor controlled the initial design of the vehicle or
manages the assets in the vehicles or if the Corporation does
not have a variable interest that could potentially be significant
to the vehicle.
Retained interests in securitized assets are initially recorded
at fair value. In addition, the Corporation may invest in debt
securities issued by unconsolidated VIEs. Fair values of these
debt securities, which are classified as trading account assets,
debt securities carried at fair value or HTM securities, are based
primarily on quoted market prices in active or inactive markets.
Generally, quoted market prices for retained residual interests
are not available; therefore, the Corporation estimates fair
values based on the present value of the associated expected
future cash flows.

Fair Value
The Corporation measures the fair values of its assets and
liabilities, where applicable, in accordance with accounting
guidance that requires an entity to base fair value on exit price.
Under this guidance, an entity is required to maximize the use
of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable
inputs in measuring fair value. Under applicable accounting
standards, fair value measurements are categorized into one of
three levels based on the inputs to the valuation technique with
the highest priority given to unadjusted quoted prices in active
markets and the lowest priority given to unobservable inputs.
The Corporation categorizes its fair value measurements of
financial instruments based on this three-level hierarchy.
Level 1 Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets or liabilities. Level 1 assets and
liabilities include debt and equity securities and
derivative contracts that are traded in an active
exchange market, as well as certain U.S. Treasury
securities that are highly liquid and are actively traded
in OTC markets.
Level 2 Observable inputs other than Level 1 prices, such as
quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted
prices in markets that are not active, or other inputs
that are observable or can be corroborated by
observable market data for substantially the full term
of the assets or liabilities. Level 2 assets and
liabilities include debt securities with quoted prices
that are traded less frequently than exchange-traded
instruments and derivative contracts where fair value is
determined using a pricing model with inputs that are
observable in the market or can be derived principally
from or corroborated by observable market data. This
category generally includes U.S. government and

Bank of America 2022 147

agency mortgage-backed (MBS) and asset-backed
securities (ABS), corporate debt securities, derivative
contracts, certain loans and LHFS.
Level 3 Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no
market activity and that are significant to the overall
fair value of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 assets
and liabilities include financial instruments for which
the determination of fair value requires significant
management judgment or estimation. The fair value for
such assets and liabilities is generally determined
using pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies or similar techniques that incorporate
the assumptions a market participant would use in
pricing the asset or liability. This category generally
includes retained residual interests in securitizations,
consumer MSRs, certain ABS, highly structured,
complex or long-dated derivative contracts, certain
loans and LHFS, IRLCs and certain CDOs where
independent pricing information cannot be obtained for
a significant portion of the underlying assets.

Income Taxes
There are two components of income tax expense: current and
deferred. Current income tax expense reflects taxes to be paid
or refunded for the current period. Deferred income tax expense
results from changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities
between periods. These gross deferred tax assets and liabilities
represent decreases or increases in taxes expected to be paid
in the future because of future reversals of temporary
differences in the bases of assets and liabilities as measured
by tax laws and their bases as reported in the financial
statements. Deferred tax assets are also recognized for tax
attributes such as net operating loss carryforwards and tax
credit carryforwards. Valuation allowances are recorded to
reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts management
concludes are more likely than not to be realized.
Income tax benefits are recognized and measured based
upon a two-step model: first, a tax position must be more likely
than not to be sustained based solely on its technical merits in
order to be recognized, and second, the benefit is measured as
the largest dollar amount of that position that is more likely than
not to be sustained upon settlement. The difference between
the benefit recognized and the tax benefit claimed on a tax
return is referred to as an unrecognized tax benefit. The
Corporation records income tax-related interest and penalties, if
applicable, within income tax expense.

Revenue Recognition
The following summarizes the Corporation’s revenue recognition
accounting policies for certain noninterest income activities.

Card Income
Card income includes annual, late and over-limit fees as well as
interchange, cash advances and other miscellaneous items
from credit and debit card transactions and from processing
card transactions for merchants. Card income is presented net
of direct costs. Interchange fees are recognized upon
settlement of the credit and debit card payment transactions
and are generally determined on a percentage basis for credit
cards and fixed rates for debit cards based on the
corresponding payment network’s rates. Substantially all card
fees are recognized at the transaction date, except for certain
time-based fees such as annual fees, which are recognized over
12 months. Fees charged to cardholders and merchants that
are estimated to be uncollectible are reserved in the allowance

148 Bank of America 2022

for loan and lease losses. Included in direct cost are rewards
and credit card partner payments. Rewards paid to cardholders
are related to points earned by the cardholder that can be
redeemed for a broad range of rewards including cash, travel
and gift cards. The points to be redeemed are estimated based
on past redemption behavior, card product type, account
transaction activity and other historical card performance. The
liability is reduced as the points are redeemed. The Corporation
also makes payments to credit card partners. The payments are
based on revenue-sharing agreements that are generally driven
by cardholder transactions and partner sales volumes. As part
of the revenue-sharing agreements, the credit card partner
provides the Corporation exclusive rights to market to the credit
card partner’s members or customers on behalf of the
Corporation.

Service Charges
Service charges include deposit and lending-related fees.
Deposit-related fees consist of fees earned on consumer and
commercial deposit activities and are generally recognized when
the transactions occur or as the service is performed. Consumer
fees are earned on consumer deposit accounts for account
maintenance and various transaction-based services, such as
ATM transactions, wire transfer activities, check and money
order processing and insufficient funds/overdraft transactions.
Commercial deposit-related fees are from the Corporation’s
Global Transaction Services business and consist of commercial
deposit and treasury management services, including account
maintenance and other services, such as payroll, sweep
account and other cash management services. Lending-related
fees generally represent transactional fees earned from certain
loan commitments, financial guarantees and SBLCs.

Investment and Brokerage Services
Investment and brokerage services consist of asset
management and brokerage fees. Asset management fees are
earned from the management of client assets under advisory
agreements or the full discretion of the Corporation’s financial
advisors (collectively referred to as assets under management
(AUM)). Asset management fees are earned as a percentage of
the client’s AUM and generally range from 50 basis points (bps)
to 150 bps of the AUM. In cases where a third party is used to
obtain a client’s investment allocation, the fee remitted to the
third party is recorded net and is not reflected in the transaction
price, as the Corporation is an agent for those services.
Brokerage fees include income earned from transactionbased services that are performed as part of investment
management services and are based on a fixed price per unit or
as a percentage of the total transaction amount. Brokerage fees
also include distribution fees and sales commissions that are
primarily in the Global Wealth & Investment Management (GWIM)
segment and are earned over time. In addition, primarily in the
Global Markets segment, brokerage fees are earned when the
Corporation fills customer orders to buy or sell various financial
products or when it acknowledges, affirms, settles and clears
transactions and/or submits trade information to the
appropriate clearing broker. Certain customers pay brokerage,
clearing and/or exchange fees imposed by relevant regulatory
bodies or exchanges in order to execute or clear trades. These
fees are recorded net and are not reflected in the transaction
price, as the Corporation is an agent for those services.

Investment Banking Income
Investment banking income includes underwriting income and
financial advisory services income. Underwriting consists of fees

earned for the placement of a customer’s debt or equity
securities. The revenue is generally earned based on a
percentage of the fixed number of shares or principal placed.
Once the number of shares or notes is determined and the
service is completed, the underwriting fees are recognized. The
Corporation incurs certain out-of-pocket expenses, such as legal
costs, in performing these services. These expenses are
recovered through the revenue the Corporation earns from the
customer and are included in operating expenses. Syndication
fees represent fees earned as the agent or lead lender
responsible for structuring, arranging and administering a loan
syndication.
Financial advisory services consist of fees earned for
assisting clients with transactions related to mergers and
acquisitions and financial restructurings. Revenue varies
depending on the size of the transaction and scope of services
performed and is generally contingent on successful completion
of the transaction. Revenue is typically recognized once the
transaction is completed and all services have been rendered.
Additionally, the Corporation may earn a fixed fee in merger and
acquisition transactions to provide a fairness opinion, with the
fees recognized when the opinion is delivered to the client.

Other Revenue Measurement and Recognition Policies
The Corporation did not disclose the value of any open
performance obligations at December 31, 2022, as its
contracts with customers generally have a fixed term that is less
than one year, an open term with a cancellation period that is
less than one year, or provisions that allow the Corporation to
recognize revenue at the amount it has the right to invoice.

common shares subject to repurchase or cancellation. Net
income allocated to common shareholders is net income
adjusted for preferred stock dividends including dividends
declared, accretion of discounts on preferred stock including
accelerated accretion when preferred stock is repaid early, and
cumulative dividends related to the current dividend period that
have not been declared as of period end, less income allocated
to participating securities. Diluted EPS is computed by dividing
income allocated to common shareholders plus dividends on
dilutive convertible preferred stock and preferred stock that can
be tendered to exercise warrants, by the weighted-average
common shares outstanding plus amounts representing the
dilutive effect of stock options outstanding, restricted stock,
restricted stock units (RSUs), outstanding warrants and the
dilution resulting from the conversion of convertible preferred
stock, if applicable.

Foreign Currency Translation
Assets, liabilities and operations of foreign branches and
subsidiaries are recorded based on the functional currency of
each entity. When the functional currency of a foreign operation
is the local currency, the assets, liabilities and operations are
translated, for consolidation purposes, from the local currency
to the U.S. dollar reporting currency at period-end rates for
assets and liabilities and generally at average rates for results
of operations. The resulting unrealized gains and losses are
reported as a component of accumulated OCI, net-of-tax. When
the foreign entity’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar, the
resulting remeasurement gains or losses on foreign currencydenominated assets or liabilities are included in earnings.

Earnings Per Common Share
Earnings per common share (EPS) is computed by dividing net
income allocated to common shareholders by the weightedaverage common shares outstanding, excluding unvested

Bank of America 2022 149

NOTE 2 Net Interest Income and Noninterest Income
The table below presents the Corporation’s net interest income and noninterest income disaggregated by revenue source for 2022,
2021 and 2020. For more information, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles. For a disaggregation of
noninterest income by business segment and All Other, see Note 23 – Business Segment Information.
(Dollars in millions)
Net interest income
Interest income
Loans and leases
Debt securities
Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell (1)
Trading account assets
Other interest income
Total interest income
Interest expense
Deposits
Short-term borrowings (1)
Trading account liabilities
Long-term debt
Total interest expense
Net interest income
Noninterest income
Fees and commissions
Card income
Interchange fees (2)
Other card income
Total card income
Service charges
Deposit-related fees
Lending-related fees
Total service charges
Investment and brokerage services
Asset management fees
Brokerage fees
Total investment and brokerage services
Investment banking fees
Underwriting income
Syndication fees
Financial advisory services
Total investment banking fees
Total fees and commissions
Market making and similar activities
Other income (loss)
Total noninterest income
(1)
(2)

2021

2022

$

$

$

$

37,919
17,127
4,560
5,521
7,438
72,565

4,718
6,978
1,538
6,869
20,103
52,462

4,096
1,987
6,083

$

$

$

2020

29,282 $
12,376
(90)
3,770
2,334
47,672

34,029
9,790
903
4,128
2,735
51,585

537
(358)
1,128
3,431
4,738
42,934 $

1,943
987
974
4,321
8,225
43,360

4,560
1,658
6,218

$

3,954
1,702
5,656

5,190
1,215
6,405

6,271
1,233
7,504

5,991
1,150
7,141

12,152
3,749
15,901

12,729
3,961
16,690

10,708
3,866
14,574

1,970
1,070
1,783
4,823
33,212
12,075
(2,799)
42,488 $

5,077
1,499
2,311
8,887
39,299
8,691
(1,811)
46,179 $

4,698
861
1,621
7,180
34,551
8,355
(738)
42,168

For more information on negative interest, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles.
Gross interchange fees and merchant income were $12.9 billion, $11.5 billion and $9.2 billion for 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and are presented net of $8.8 billion, $6.9 billion and
$5.5 billion of expenses for rewards and partner payments as well as certain other card costs for the same periods.

150 Bank of America 2022

NOTE 3 Derivatives

Corporation’s derivatives and hedging activities, see Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles. The following
tables present derivative instruments included on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet in derivative assets and liabilities
at December 31, 2022 and 2021. Balances are presented on a
gross basis, prior to the application of counterparty and cash
collateral netting. Total derivative assets and liabilities are
adjusted on an aggregate basis to take into consideration the
effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements and
have been reduced by cash collateral received or paid.

Derivative Balances
Derivatives are entered into on behalf of customers, for trading
or to support risk management activities. Derivatives used in
risk management activities include derivatives that may or may
not be designated in qualifying hedge accounting relationships.
Derivatives that are not designated in qualifying hedge
accounting relationships are referred to as other risk
management derivatives. For more information on the

December 31, 2022
Gross Derivative Assets

(Dollars in billions)

Interest rate contracts
Swaps
$
Futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Foreign exchange contracts
Swaps
Spot, futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Equity contracts
Swaps
Futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Commodity contracts
Swaps
Futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Credit derivatives (4)
Purchased credit derivatives:
Credit default swaps
Total return swaps/options
Written credit derivatives:
Credit default swaps
Total return swaps/options
Gross derivative assets/liabilities
Less: Legally enforceable master netting agreements
Less: Cash collateral received/paid
Total derivative assets/liabilities
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Contract/
Notional (1)
18,285.9
2,796.3
1,657.9
1,594.7

Trading and
Other Risk
Management
Derivatives
$

138.2
8.6
—
42.4

Qualifying
Accounting
Hedges
$

20.7
—
—
—

Gross Derivative Liabilities
Trading and
Other Risk
Management
Derivatives

Total
$

158.9
8.6
—
42.4

$

120.3
7.8
41.4
—

Qualifying
Accounting
Hedges
$

36.7
—
—
—

Total
$

157.0
7.8
41.4
—

1,509.0
4,159.3
392.2
362.6

44.0
59.9
—
8.3

0.3
0.1
—
—

44.3
60.0
—
8.3

43.3
62.1
8.1
—

0.4
0.6
—
—

43.7
62.7
8.1
—

394.0
114.6
746.8
671.6

10.8
3.3
—
40.9

—
—
—
—

10.8
3.3
—
40.9

12.2
1.0
45.0
—

—
—
—
—

12.2
1.0
45.0
—

56.0
157.3
59.5
61.8

5.1
3.0
—
3.6

—
—
—
—

5.1
3.0
—
3.6

5.3
2.3
3.3
—

—
0.8
—
—

5.3
3.1
3.3
—

319.9
71.5

2.8
0.7

—
—

2.8
0.7

1.6
3.0

—
—

1.6
3.0

295.2
85.3

1.2
4.4
377.2

—
—
21.1

2.4
0.9
360.0

—
—
38.5

$

$

$

$

1.2
4.4
398.3
(315.9)
(33.8)
48.6

$

$

$

$

2.4
0.9
398.5
(315.9)
(37.8)
44.8

Represents the total contract/notional amount of derivative assets and liabilities outstanding.
Includes certain out-of-the-money purchased options that have a liability amount primarily due to the deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
Includes certain out-of-the-money written options that have an asset amount primarily due to the deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
The net derivative asset (liability) and notional amount of written credit derivatives for which the Corporation held purchased credit derivatives with identical underlying referenced names were
$(1.2) billion and $276.9 billion at December 31, 2022.

Bank of America 2022 151

December 31, 2021
Gross Derivative Assets

(Dollars in billions)

Interest rate contracts
Swaps
Futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Foreign exchange contracts
Swaps
Spot, futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Equity contracts
Swaps
Futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Commodity contracts
Swaps
Futures and forwards
Written options (2)
Purchased options (3)
Credit derivatives (4)
Purchased credit derivatives:
Credit default swaps
Total return swaps/options
Written credit derivatives:
Credit default swaps
Total return swaps/options
Gross derivative assets/liabilities
Less: Legally enforceable master netting agreements
Less: Cash collateral received/paid
Total derivative assets/liabilities
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Contract/
Notional (1)
$ 18,068.1
2,243.2
1,616.1
1,673.6

Trading and
Other Risk
Management
Derivatives
$

150.5
1.1
—
33.1

Qualifying
Accounting
Hedges
$

8.9
—
—
—

Gross Derivative Liabilities
Trading and
Other Risk
Management
Derivatives

Total
$

159.4
1.1
—
33.1

$

156.4
1.0
28.8
—

Qualifying
Accounting
Hedges
$

4.4
—
—
—

Total
$

160.8
1.0
28.8
—

1,420.9
4,087.2
287.2
267.6

28.6
37.1
—
4.1

0.2
0.3
—
—

28.8
37.4
—
4.1

30.5
37.7
4.1
—

0.2
0.2
—
—

30.7
37.9
4.1
—

443.8
113.3
737.7
657.0

12.3
0.5
—
55.9

—
—
—
—

12.3
0.5
—
55.9

14.5
1.7
58.5
—

—
—
—
—

14.5
1.7
58.5
—

47.7
101.5
44.4
38.3

3.1
2.3
—
3.2

—
—
—
—

3.1
2.3
—
3.2

6.0
0.3
2.6
—

—
1.1
—
—

6.0
1.4
2.6
—

297.0
85.3

1.9
0.2

—
—

1.9
0.2

4.3
1.1

—
—

4.3
1.1

279.8
85.3

4.2
0.9
339.0

—
—
9.4

4.2
0.9
348.4
(282.3)
(30.8)
35.3

1.6
0.5
349.6

—
—
5.9

1.6
0.5
355.5
(282.3)
(35.5)
37.7

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

Represents the total contract/notional amount of derivative assets and liabilities outstanding.
Includes certain out-of-the-money purchased options that have a liability amount primarily due to the deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
Includes certain out-of-the-money written options that have an asset amount primarily due to the deferral of the option premiums to the end of the contract.
The net derivative asset (liability) and notional amount of written credit derivatives for which the Corporation held purchased credit derivatives with identical underlying referenced names were $2.3
billion and $258.4 billion at December 31, 2021.

Offsetting of Derivatives
The Corporation enters into International Swaps and Derivatives
Association, Inc. (ISDA) master netting agreements or similar
agreements with substantially all of the Corporation’s derivative
counterparties. Where legally enforceable, these master netting
agreements give the Corporation, in the event of default by the
counterparty, the right to liquidate securities held as collateral
and to offset receivables and payables with the same
counterparty. For purposes of the Consolidated Balance Sheet,
the Corporation offsets derivative assets and liabilities and cash
collateral held with the same counterparty where it has such a
legally enforceable master netting agreement.
The following table presents derivative instruments included
in derivative assets and liabilities on the Consolidated Balance

152 Bank of America 2022

Sheet at December 31, 2022 and 2021 by primary risk (e.g.,
interest rate risk) and the platform, where applicable, on which
these derivatives are transacted. Balances are presented on a
gross basis, prior to the application of counterparty and cash
collateral netting. Total gross derivative assets and liabilities
are adjusted on an aggregate basis to take into consideration
the effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements,
which include reducing the balance for counterparty netting and
cash collateral received or paid.
For more information on offsetting of securities financing
agreements, see Note 10 – Securities Financing Agreements,
Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted Cash.

Offsetting of Derivatives (1)

(Dollars in billions)

Interest rate contracts
Over-the-counter
Exchange-traded
Over-the-counter cleared
Foreign exchange contracts
Over-the-counter
Over-the-counter cleared
Equity contracts
Over-the-counter
Exchange-traded
Commodity contracts
Over-the-counter
Exchange-traded
Over-the-counter cleared
Credit derivatives
Over-the-counter
Over-the-counter cleared
Total gross derivative assets/liabilities, before netting
Over-the-counter
Exchange-traded
Over-the-counter cleared
Less: Legally enforceable master netting agreements and cash collateral received/paid
Over-the-counter
Exchange-traded
Over-the-counter cleared
Derivative assets/liabilities, after netting
Other gross derivative assets/liabilities (2)
Total derivative assets/liabilities
Less: Financial instruments collateral (3)
Total net derivative assets/liabilities
(1)

(2)
(3)

Derivative
Derivative
Assets
Liabilities
December 31, 2021

Derivative
Derivative
Assets
Liabilities
December 31, 2022
$

$

138.4
0.4
71.4

$

132.3
0.1
71.1

$

171.3
0.2
22.6

$

166.3
—
22.5

109.7
1.3

110.6
1.2

67.9
1.1

70.5
1.1

21.5
33.0

22.6
33.8

29.2
38.3

32.9
38.4

8.3
2.4
0.3

9.3
1.9
0.3

6.1
1.4
0.1

7.6
1.3
0.1

8.9
—

7.5
—

5.2
1.8

5.3
1.8

286.8
35.8
73.0

282.3
35.8
72.6

279.7
39.9
25.6

282.6
39.7
25.5

(243.8)
(33.5)
(72.4)
45.9
2.7
48.6
(18.5)
30.1

(248.2)
(33.5)
(72.0)
37.0
7.8
44.8
(7.4)
37.4

(250.3)
(37.8)
(25.0)
32.1
3.2
35.3
(11.8)
23.5

(254.6)
(37.8)
(25.4)
30.0
7.7
37.7
(10.6)
27.1

$

$

$

Over-the-counter derivatives include bilateral transactions between the Corporation and a particular counterparty. Over-the-counter cleared derivatives include bilateral transactions between the
Corporation and a counterparty where the transaction is cleared through a clearinghouse. Exchange-traded derivatives include listed options transacted on an exchange.
Consists of derivatives entered into under master netting agreements where the enforceability of these agreements is uncertain under bankruptcy laws in some countries or industries.
Amounts are limited to the derivative asset/liability balance and, accordingly, do not include excess collateral received/pledged. Financial instruments collateral includes securities collateral
received or pledged and cash securities held and posted at third-party custodians that are not offset on the Consolidated Balance Sheet but shown as a reduction to derive net derivative assets
and liabilities.

ALM and Risk Management Derivatives
The Corporation’s ALM and risk management activities include
the use of derivatives to mitigate risk to the Corporation
including derivatives designated in qualifying hedge accounting
relationships and derivatives used in other risk management
activities. Interest rate, foreign exchange, equity, commodity
and credit contracts are utilized in the Corporation's ALM and
risk management activities.
The Corporation maintains an overall interest rate risk
management strategy that incorporates the use of interest rate
contracts, which are generally non-leveraged generic interest
rate and basis swaps, options, futures and forwards, to
minimize significant fluctuations in earnings caused by interest
rate volatility. The Corporation’s goal is to manage interest rate
sensitivity and volatility so that movements in interest rates do
not significantly adversely affect earnings or capital. As a result
of interest rate fluctuations, hedged fixed-rate assets and
liabilities appreciate or depreciate in fair value. Gains or losses
on the derivative instruments that are linked to the hedged
fixed-rate assets and liabilities are expected to substantially
offset this unrealized appreciation or depreciation.
Market risk, including interest rate risk, can be substantial in
the mortgage business. Market risk in the mortgage business is
the risk that values of mortgage assets or revenues will be
adversely affected by changes in market conditions such as
interest rate movements. To mitigate the interest rate risk in
mortgage banking production income, the Corporation utilizes

forward loan sale commitments and other derivative
instruments, including purchased options, and certain debt
securities. The Corporation also utilizes derivatives such as
interest rate options, interest rate swaps, forward settlement
contracts and eurodollar futures to hedge certain market risks
of MSRs.
The Corporation uses foreign exchange contracts to manage
the foreign exchange risk associated with certain foreign
currency-denominated assets and liabilities, as well as the
Corporation’s investments in non-U.S. subsidiaries. Exposure to
loss on these contracts will increase or decrease over their
respective lives as currency exchange and interest rates
fluctuate.
The Corporation purchases credit derivatives to manage
credit risk related to certain funded and unfunded credit
exposures. Credit derivatives include credit default swaps
(CDS), total return swaps and swaptions. These derivatives are
recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair value with
changes in fair value recorded in other income.

Derivatives Designated as Accounting Hedges
The Corporation uses various types of interest rate and foreign
exchange derivative contracts to protect against changes in the
fair value of its assets and liabilities due to fluctuations in
interest rates and foreign exchange rates (fair value hedges).
The Corporation also uses these types of contracts to protect
against changes in the cash flows of its assets and liabilities,

Bank of America 2022 153

and other forecasted transactions (cash flow hedges). The
Corporation hedges its net investment in consolidated non-U.S.
operations determined to have functional currencies other than
the U.S. dollar using forward exchange contracts and crosscurrency basis swaps, and by issuing foreign currency-

denominated debt (net investment hedges).

Fair Value Hedges
The table below summarizes information related to fair value
hedges for 2022, 2021 and 2020.

Gains and Losses on Derivatives Designated as Fair Value Hedges
(Dollars in millions)

Interest rate risk on long-term debt (1)
Interest rate and foreign currency risk on long-term debt (2)
Interest rate risk on available-for-sale securities (3)
Price risk on commodity inventory (4)
Total
(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

$

$

2022
(26,654)
(120)
21,991
674
(4,109)

Derivative
2021
$
(7,018)
(90)
5,203
—
$
(1,905)

$

$

2020
7,091
783
(44)
—
7,830

$

$

2022
26,825
119
(22,280)
(674)
3,990

Hedged Item
2021
$
6,838
79
(5,167)
—
$
1,750

$

$

2020
(7,220)
(783)
49
—
(7,954)

Amounts are recorded in interest expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
For 2022, 2021 and 2020, the derivative amount includes gains (losses) of $(37) million, $(73) million and $701 million in interest expense, $(81) million, $0 and $73 million in market making
and similar activities, and $(2) million, $(17) million and $9 million in accumulated OCI, respectively. Line item totals are in the Consolidated Statement of Income and on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet.
Amounts are recorded in interest income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
Amounts are recorded in market making and similar activities in the Consolidated Statement of Income.

The table below summarizes the carrying value of hedged assets and liabilities that are designated and qualifying in fair value
hedging relationships along with the cumulative amount of fair value hedging adjustments included in the carrying value that have
been recorded in the current hedging relationships. These fair value hedging adjustments are open basis adjustments that are not
subject to amortization as long as the hedging relationship remains designated.

Designated Fair Value Hedged Assets and Liabilities
December 31, 2022
Cumulative
Fair Value
Carrying Value
Adjustments (1)
(21,372)
$
187,402 $
(18,190)
167,518
146
16,119

(Dollars in millions)

Long-term debt (2)
Available-for-sale debt securities (2, 3, 4)
Trading account assets (5)
(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)

December 31, 2021
Cumulative
Fair Value
Carrying Value
Adjustments (1)
3,987
$
181,745 $
(2,294)
209,038
32
2,067

Increase (decrease) to carrying value.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the cumulative fair value adjustments remaining on long-term debt and available-for-sale debt securities from discontinued hedging relationships resulted in an
increase of $137 million and $1.5 billion in the related liability and a decrease in the related asset of $4.9 billion and $1.0 billion, which are being amortized over the remaining contractual life of
the de-designated hedged items.
These amounts include the amortized cost of the prepayable financial assets used to designate hedging relationships in which the hedged item is the last layer expected to be remaining at the
end of the hedging relationship (i.e. last-of-layer hedging relationship). At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the amortized cost of the closed portfolios used in these hedging relationships was
$21.4 billion and $21.1 billion, of which $9.2 billion and $6.9 billion was designated in the last-of-layer hedging relationship. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the cumulative adjustment
associated with these hedging relationships was a decrease of $451 million and $172 million.
Carrying value represents amortized cost.
Represents hedging activities related to certain commodities inventory.

Cash Flow and Net Investment Hedges

to primarily decrease net interest income related to the
respective hedged items. For open cash flow hedges, the
maximum length of time over which forecasted transactions are
hedged is approximately seven years. For terminated cash flow
hedges, the time period over which the forecasted transactions
will be recognized in interest income is approximately five years,
with the aggregated amount beyond this time period being
insignificant.

The table below summarizes certain information related to cash
flow hedges and net investment hedges for 2022, 2021 and
2020. Of the $11.9 billion after-tax net loss ($15.9 billion
pretax) on derivatives in accumulated OCI at December 31,
2022, losses of $4.4 billion after-tax ($5.9 billion pretax)
related to both open and terminated cash flow hedges are
expected to be reclassified into earnings in the next 12 months.
These net losses reclassified into earnings are expected

Gains and Losses on Derivatives Designated as Cash Flow and Net Investment Hedges
Gains (Losses) Recognized in
Accumulated OCI on Derivatives
2021
2020
2022

(Dollars in millions, amounts pretax)

Cash flow hedges
Interest rate risk on variable-rate portfolios (1)
Price risk on forecasted MBS purchases (1)
Price risk on certain compensation plans (2)
Total
Net investment hedges
Foreign exchange risk (3)
(1)
(2)
(3)

$

$

(13,492)
(129)
(88)
(13,709)

$

1,710

$

$

$

(2,686)
(249)
93
(2,842)

$

$

1,451

$

763
241
85
1,089
(834)

Gains (Losses) in Income
Reclassified from Accumulated OCI
2021
2020
2022
$

$
$

(338)
11
29
(298)
3

$

148
26
55
229

$

(7)
9
12
14

$

23

$

4

$

$

Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in interest income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in compensation and benefits expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
Amounts reclassified from accumulated OCI are recorded in other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income. Amounts excluded from effectiveness testing and recognized in market making
and similar activities were losses of $38 million, $123 million and $11 million in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

154 Bank of America 2022

Other Risk Management Derivatives
Other risk management derivatives are used by the Corporation
to reduce certain risk exposures by economically hedging
various assets and liabilities. The table below presents gains
(losses) on these derivatives for 2022, 2021 and 2020. These
gains (losses) are largely offset by the income or expense
recorded on the hedged item.

Gains and Losses on Other Risk Management Derivatives
(Dollars in millions)

Interest rate risk on mortgage activities (1, 2)
Credit risk on loans (2)
Interest rate and foreign currency risk on
asset and liability management activities (3)
Price risk on certain compensation plans (4)
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)

$

2022
(326)
(37)
4,713
(1,073)

$

2021
(18)
(25)
1,757
917

$

2020
611
(68)
(2,971)
700

Includes hedges of interest rate risk on MSRs and IRLCs to originate mortgage loans that will
be held for sale.
Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in other income.
Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in market making and similar activities.
Gains (losses) on these derivatives are recorded in compensation and benefits expense.

Transfers of Financial Assets with Risk Retained
through Derivatives
The Corporation enters into certain transactions involving the
transfer of financial assets that are accounted for as sales
where substantially all of the economic exposure to the
transferred financial assets is retained through derivatives (e.g.,
interest rate and/or credit), but the Corporation does not retain
control over the assets transferred. At both December 31, 2022
and 2021, the Corporation had transferred $4.8 billion of nonU.S. government-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities to a
third-party trust and retained economic exposure to the
transferred assets through derivative contracts. In connection
with these transfers, the Corporation received gross cash
proceeds of $4.9 billion and $4.8 billion at the transfer dates.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the fair value of the
transferred securities was $4.7 billion and $5.0 billion.

Sales and Trading Revenue
The Corporation enters into trading derivatives to facilitate client
transactions and to manage risk exposures arising from trading
account assets and liabilities. It is the Corporation’s policy to
include these derivative instruments in its trading activities,
which include derivatives and non-derivative cash instruments.
The resulting risk from these derivatives is managed on a
portfolio basis as part of the Corporation’s Global Markets
business segment. The related sales and trading revenue
generated within Global Markets is recorded in various income
statement line items, including market making and similar
activities and net interest income as well as other revenue
categories.
Sales and trading revenue includes changes in the fair value
and realized gains and losses on the sales of trading and other
assets, net interest income, and fees primarily from
commissions on equity securities. Revenue is generated by the
difference in the client price for an instrument and the price at
which the trading desk can execute the trade in the dealer
market. For equity securities, commissions related to purchases
and sales are recorded in the “Other” column in the Sales and
Trading Revenue table. Changes in the fair value of these
securities are included in market making and similar activities.
For debt securities, revenue, with the exception of interest
associated with the debt securities, is typically included in
market making and similar activities. Unlike commissions for
equity securities, the initial revenue related to broker-dealer

services for debt securities is typically included in the pricing of
the instrument rather than being charged through separate fee
arrangements. Therefore, this revenue is recorded in market
making and similar activities as part of the initial mark to fair
value. For derivatives, the majority of revenue is included in
market making and similar activities. In transactions where the
Corporation acts as agent, which include exchange-traded
futures and options, fees are recorded in other income.
The table below, which includes both derivatives and nonderivative cash instruments, identifies the amounts in the
respective income statement line items attributable to the
Corporation’s sales and trading revenue in Global Markets,
categorized by primary risk, for 2022, 2021 and 2020. This
table includes debit valuation adjustment (DVA) and funding
valuation adjustment (FVA) gains (losses). Global Markets
results in Note 23 – Business Segment Information are
presented on a fully taxable-equivalent (FTE) basis. The table
below is not presented on an FTE basis.

Sales and Trading Revenue
Market
making
and similar
activities

Net
Interest
Income

(Dollars in millions)

Interest rate risk
Foreign exchange risk
Equity risk
Credit risk
Other risk (2)
Total sales and trading
revenue

$

1,919
1,981
6,077
592
835

$

$

11,404

$

Interest rate risk
Foreign exchange risk
Equity risk
Credit risk
Other risk (2)
Total sales and trading
revenue

$

523
1,505
4,581
1,390
759

$

$

8,758

$

Interest rate risk
Foreign exchange risk
Equity risk
Credit risk
Other risk (2)
Total sales and trading
revenue

$

2,236
1,486
3,656
783
308

$

$

8,469

$

(1)

(2)

Other (1)

2022
1,619 $
46
(1,288)
2,228
(171)
2,434

Total

392
(44)
1,757
177
15

$

3,930
1,983
6,546
2,997
679

$

2,297

$

16,135

2021
1,794 $
(80)
(5)
1,684
(128)

217
14
1,834
556
124

$

2,534
1,439
6,410
3,630
755

3,265

$

2,745

$ 14,768

2020
2,279 $
(19)
(77)
1,758
4

229
2
1,801
331
44

$

3,945

2,407

$ 14,821

$

4,744
1,469
5,380
2,872
356

Represents amounts in investment and brokerage services and other income that are
recorded in Global Markets and included in the definition of sales and trading revenue.
Includes investment and brokerage services revenue of $2.0 billion, $1.9 billion and $1.9
billion in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Includes commodity risk.

Credit Derivatives
The Corporation enters into credit derivatives primarily to
facilitate client transactions and to manage credit risk
exposures. Credit derivatives derive value based on an
underlying third-party referenced obligation or a portfolio of
referenced obligations and generally require the Corporation, as
the seller of credit protection, to make payments to a buyer
upon the occurrence of a predefined credit event. Such credit
events generally include bankruptcy of the referenced credit
entity and failure to pay under the obligation, as well as
acceleration of indebtedness and payment repudiation or
moratorium. For credit derivatives based on a portfolio of
referenced credits or credit indices, the Corporation may not be
required to make payment until a specified amount of loss has
Bank of America 2022 155

occurred and/or may only be required to make payment up to a
specified amount.
Credit derivatives are classified as investment and noninvestment grade based on the credit quality of the underlying
referenced obligation. The Corporation considers ratings of BBBor higher as investment grade. Non-investment grade includes
non-rated credit derivative instruments. The Corporation

discloses internal categorizations of investment grade and noninvestment grade consistent with how risk is managed for these
instruments.
Credit derivative instruments where the Corporation is the
seller of credit protection and their expiration at December 31,
2022 and 2021 are summarized in the table below.

Credit Derivative Instruments
Less than
One Year

One to
Three Years

(Dollars in millions)

Credit default swaps:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total return swaps/options:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total credit derivatives
Credit-related notes:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total credit-related notes
Credit default swaps:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total return swaps/options:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total credit derivatives

$

$
$
$

$

$

2
120
122
55
332
387
509
—
—
—

34,670
15,229
49,899
38,722
32,764
71,486
121,385

$

$
$
$

$

$

25
516
541
336
9
345
886

Three to
Five Years
December 31, 2022
Carrying Value
$

$

133
870
1,003
—
132
132
1,135

Over Five
Years

$

$

— $
19 $
7
6
7 $
25 $
Maximum Payout/Notional
66,170
29,629
95,799
10,407
500
10,907
106,706

$

$

93,237
30,891
124,128
—
2,054
2,054
126,182

$

$

34
697
731
—
10
10
741
1,017
1,035
2,052

18,677
6,662
25,339
—
897
897
26,236

Total

$

$
$
$

$

$

194
2,203
2,397
391
483
874
3,271
1,036
1,048
2,084

212,754
82,411
295,165
49,129
36,215
85,344
380,509

December 31, 2021
Carrying Value
Credit default swaps:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total return swaps/options:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total credit derivatives
Credit-related notes:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total credit-related notes
Credit default swaps:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total return swaps/options:
Investment grade
Non-investment grade
Total
Total credit derivatives

The notional amount represents the maximum amount
payable by the Corporation for most credit derivatives. However,
the Corporation does not monitor its exposure to credit
derivatives based solely on the notional amount because this
measure does not take into consideration the probability of
occurrence. As such, the notional amount is not a reliable

156 Bank of America 2022

$

$
$
$

$

$

—
34
34
35
105
140
174
—
5
5

34,503
16,119
50,622
49,626
22,621
72,247
122,869

$

$
$
$

$

$

5
250
255
388
—
388
643

$

$

79
453
532
—
16
16
548

$

$

— $
36 $
—
9
— $
45 $
Maximum Payout/Notional
66,334
29,233
95,567
11,494
717
12,211
107,778

$

$

73,444
34,356
107,800
78
642
720
108,520

$

$

49
769
818
—
—
—
818
412
1,334
1,746

17,844
7,961
25,805
—
73
73
25,878

$

$
$
$

$

$

133
1,506
1,639
423
121
544
2,183
448
1,348
1,796

192,125
87,669
279,794
61,198
24,053
85,251
365,045

indicator of the Corporation’s exposure to these contracts.
Instead, a risk framework is used to define risk tolerances and
establish limits so that certain credit risk-related losses occur
within acceptable, predefined limits.
Credit-related notes in the preceding table include
investments in securities issued by CDO, collateralized loan

obligation (CLO) and credit-linked note vehicles. These
instruments are primarily classified as trading securities. The
carrying value of these instruments equals the Corporation’s
maximum exposure to loss. The Corporation is not obligated to
make any payments to the entities under the terms of the
securities owned.

Credit-related Contingent Features and Collateral
The Corporation executes the majority of its derivative contracts
in the OTC market with large, international financial institutions,
including broker-dealers and, to a lesser degree, with a variety
of non-financial companies. A significant majority of the
derivative transactions are executed on a daily margin basis.
Therefore, events such as a credit rating downgrade (depending
on the ultimate rating level) or a breach of credit covenants
would typically require an increase in the amount of collateral
required of the counterparty, where applicable, and/or allow the
Corporation to take additional protective measures such as
early termination of all trades. Further, as previously discussed
on page 152, the Corporation enters into legally enforceable
master netting agreements that reduce risk by permitting
closeout and netting of transactions with the same counterparty
upon the occurrence of certain events.
Certain of the Corporation’s derivative contracts contain
credit risk-related contingent features, primarily in the form of
ISDA master netting agreements and credit support
documentation that enhance the creditworthiness of these
instruments compared to other obligations of the respective
counterparty with whom the Corporation has transacted. These
contingent features may be for the benefit of the Corporation as
well as its counterparties with respect to changes in the
Corporation’s creditworthiness and the mark-to-market exposure
under the derivative transactions. At December 31, 2022 and
2021, the Corporation held cash and securities collateral of
$101.3 billion and $91.4 billion and posted cash and securities
collateral of $81.2 billion and $79.3 billion in the normal course
of business under derivative agreements, excluding crossproduct margining agreements where clients are permitted to
margin on a net basis for both derivative and secured financing
arrangements.
In connection with certain OTC derivative contracts and other
trading agreements, the Corporation can be required to provide
additional collateral or to terminate transactions with certain
counterparties in the event of a downgrade of the senior debt
ratings of the Corporation or certain subsidiaries. The amount of
additional collateral required depends on the contract and is
usually a fixed incremental amount and/or the market value of
the exposure.
At December 31, 2022, the amount of collateral, calculated
based on the terms of the contracts, that the Corporation and
certain subsidiaries could be required to post to counterparties
but had not yet posted to counterparties was $3.2 billion,
including $1.6 billion for Bank of America, National Association
(BANA).
Some counterparties are currently able to unilaterally
terminate certain contracts, or the Corporation or certain
subsidiaries may be required to take other action such as find a
suitable replacement or obtain a guarantee. At December 31,
2022 and 2021, the liability recorded for these derivative
contracts was not significant.
The following table presents the amount of additional
collateral that would have been contractually required by

derivative contracts and other trading agreements at
December 31, 2022 if the rating agencies had downgraded their
long-term senior debt ratings for the Corporation or certain
subsidiaries by one incremental notch and by an additional
second incremental notch. The table also presents derivative
liabilities that would be subject to unilateral termination by
counterparties upon downgrade of the Corporation's or certain
subsidiaries' long-term senior debt ratings.
Additional Collateral Required to be Posted and Derivative
Liabilities Subject to Unilateral Termination Upon Downgrade
at December 31, 2022
One
Incremental
Notch

(Dollars in millions)

Additional collateral required to be posted
upon downgrade
Bank of America Corporation
Bank of America, N.A. and subsidiaries (1)
Derivative liabilities subject to unilateral
termination upon downgrade
Derivative liabilities
Collateral posted
(1)

Second
Incremental
Notch

$

230
66

$

913
668

$

92
77

$

1,073
300

Included in Bank of America Corporation collateral requirements in this table.

Valuation Adjustments on Derivatives
The Corporation records credit risk valuation adjustments on
derivatives in order to properly reflect the credit quality of the
counterparties and its own credit quality. The Corporation
calculates valuation adjustments on derivatives based on a
modeled expected exposure that incorporates current market
risk factors. The exposure also takes into consideration credit
mitigants such as enforceable master netting agreements and
collateral. CDS spread data is used to estimate the default
probabilities and severities that are applied to the exposures.
Where no observable credit default data is available for
counterparties, the Corporation uses proxies and other market
data to estimate default probabilities and severity.
The table below presents credit valuation adjustment (CVA),
DVA and FVA gains (losses) on derivatives (excluding the effect
of any related hedge activities), which are recorded in market
making and similar activities, for 2022, 2021 and 2020. CVA
gains reduce the cumulative CVA thereby increasing the
derivative assets balance. DVA gains increase the cumulative
DVA thereby decreasing the derivative liabilities balance. CVA
and DVA losses have the opposite impact. FVA gains related to
derivative assets reduce the cumulative FVA thereby increasing
the derivative assets balance. FVA gains related to derivative
liabilities increase the cumulative FVA thereby decreasing the
derivative liabilities balance. FVA losses have the opposite
impact.

Valuation Adjustments Gains (Losses) on Derivatives (1)
(Dollars in millions)

Derivative assets (CVA)
Derivative assets/liabilities (FVA)
Derivative liabilities (DVA)
(1)

$

2022
(80)
125
194

$

2021
208
(2)
3

$

2020
(118)
(24)
24

At December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, cumulative CVA reduced the derivative assets
balance by $518 million, $438 million and $646 million, cumulative FVA reduced the net
derivative balance by $54 million, $179 million and $177 million, and cumulative DVA
reduced the derivative liabilities balance by $506 million, $312 million and $309 million,
respectively.

Bank of America 2022 157

NOTE 4 Securities
The table below presents the amortized cost, gross unrealized gains and losses, and fair value of AFS debt securities, other debt
securities carried at fair value and HTM debt securities at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Debt Securities
Amortized
Cost

Gross
Gross
Unrealized
Unrealized
Gains
Losses
December 31, 2022

$

$

(Dollars in millions)

Available-for-sale debt securities
Mortgage-backed securities:
Agency
Agency-collateralized mortgage obligations
Commercial
Non-agency residential (1)
Total mortgage-backed securities
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Non-U.S. securities
Other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total available-for-sale debt securities
Other debt securities carried at fair value (2)
Total debt securities carried at fair value
Held-to-maturity debt securities
Agency mortgage-backed securities
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Other taxable securities
Total held-to-maturity debt securities
Total debt securities (3,4)
(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

25,204
2,452
6,894
461
35,011
160,773
13,455
4,728
11,518
225,485

5
—
28
15
48
18
4
1
19
90

$

(1,767)
(231)
(515)
(90)
(2,603)
(1,769)
(52)
(84)
(279)
(4,787)

Fair
Value

$

Amortized
Cost

23,442
2,221
6,407
386
32,456
159,022
13,407
4,645
11,258
220,788

$ 45,268
3,331
19,036
591
68,226
197,853
11,933
2,725
15,155
295,892

Gross
Gross
Unrealized
Unrealized
Gains
Losses
December 31, 2021

$

1,257
74
647
25
2,003
1,610
—
39
317
3,969

$

Fair
Value

(186)
(25)
(79)
(33)
(323)
(318)
—
(3)
(39)
(683)

$ 46,339
3,380
19,604
583
69,906
199,145
11,933
2,761
15,433
299,178

8,986
234,471

376
466

(156)
(4,943)

9,206
229,994

8,873
304,765

105
4,074

(83)
(766)

8,895
308,073

503,233
121,597
8,033
632,863
$ 867,334

—
—
—
—
466

(87,319)
(20,259)
(1,018)
(108,596)
$ (113,539)

415,914
101,338
7,015
524,267
$ 754,261

553,721
111,859
9,011
674,591
$ 979,356

3,855
254
147
4,256
8,330

(10,366)
(2,395)
(196)
(12,957)
$ (13,723)

547,210
109,718
8,962
665,890
$ 973,963

$

$

At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the underlying collateral type included approximately 17 percent and 21 percent prime and 83 percent and 79 percent subprime.
Primarily includes non-U.S. securities used to satisfy certain international regulatory requirements. Any changes in value are reported in market making and similar activities. For detail on the
components, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements.
Includes securities pledged as collateral of $104.5 billion and $111.9 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The Corporation held debt securities from FNMA and FHLMC that each exceeded 10 percent of shareholders’ equity, with an amortized cost of $290.5 billion and $176.7 billion, and a fair value of
$239.6 billion and $144.6 billion at December 31, 2022, and an amortized cost of $345.3 billion and $205.3 billion, and a fair value of $342.5 billion and $202.4 billion at December 31, 2021.

At December 31, 2022, the accumulated net unrealized loss
on AFS debt securities, excluding the amount related to debt
securities previously transferred to held to maturity, included in
accumulated OCI was $3.5 billion, net of the related income tax
benefit of $1.2 billion. At December 31, 2022 and 2021,
nonperforming AFS debt securities held by the Corporation were
not significant.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
$191.1 billion and $268.5 billion in AFS debt securities, which
were primarily U.S. agency and U.S. Treasury securities that
have a zero credit loss assumption. For more information on the
zero credit loss assumption, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles. For the remaining $29.7 billion
and $30.7 billion in AFS debt securities at December 31, 2022
and 2021, the amount of ECL was not significant. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had $524.3
billion and $665.9 billion in HTM debt securities, which were
substantially all U.S agency and U.S. Treasury securities that
have a zero credit loss assumption.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation held
equity securities at an aggregate fair value of $581 million

158 Bank of America 2022

and $513 million and other equity securities, as valued under
the measurement alternative, at a carrying value of $340 million
and $266 million, both of which are included in other assets. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation also held
money market investments at a fair value of $868 million and
$707 million, which are included in time deposits placed and
other short-term investments.
The gross realized gains and losses on sales of AFS debt
securities for 2022, 2021 and 2020 are presented in the table
below.

Gains and Losses on Sales of AFS Debt Securities
(Dollars in millions)

Gross gains
Gross losses
Net gains on sales of AFS debt securities
Income tax expense attributable to realized net
gains on sales of AFS debt securities

2022
2021
2020
1,251 $
49 $
423
(1,219)
(27)
(12)
$
32 $
22 $
411

$

$

8

$

5

$

103

The table below presents the fair value and the associated gross unrealized losses on AFS debt securities and whether these
securities have had gross unrealized losses for less than 12 months or for 12 months or longer at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Total AFS Debt Securities in a Continuous Unrealized Loss Position
Less than Twelve Months
Gross
Fair
Unrealized
Value
Losses

Twelve Months or Longer
Gross
Fair
Unrealized
Value
Losses
December 31, 2022

(Dollars in millions)

Continuously unrealized loss-positioned AFS debt securities
Mortgage-backed securities:
Agency
Agency-collateralized mortgage obligations
Commercial
Non-agency residential
Total mortgage-backed securities
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Non-U.S. securities
Other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total AFS debt securities in a continuous
unrealized loss position

Total
Gross
Unrealized
Losses

Fair
Value

$

18,759
1,165
3,273
264
23,461
36,730
9,399
2,036
607

$

(1,118)
(96)
(150)
(65)
(1,429)
(308)
(34)
(16)
(28)

$

4,437
1,022
2,258
97
7,814
118,636
756
1,580
2,849

$

(649)
(135)
(365)
(25)
(1,174)
(1,461)
(18)
(68)
(251)

$

23,196
2,187
5,531
361
31,275
155,366
10,155
3,616
3,456

$

(1,767)
(231)
(515)
(90)
(2,603)
(1,769)
(52)
(84)
(279)

$

72,233

$

(1,815)

$

131,635

$

(2,972)

$

203,868

$

(4,787)

December 31, 2021
Continuously unrealized loss-positioned AFS debt securities
Mortgage-backed securities:
Agency
Agency-collateralized mortgage obligations
Commercial
Non-agency residential
Total mortgage-backed securities
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total AFS debt securities in a continuous
unrealized loss position

$

11,733
1,427
3,451
241
16,852
103,307
—
502

$

(166)
(22)
(41)
(13)
(242)
(272)
—
(16)

$

815
122
776
174
1,887
4,850
82
109

$

(20)
(3)
(38)
(20)
(81)
(46)
(3)
(23)

$

12,548
1,549
4,227
415
18,739
108,157
82
611

$

(186)
(25)
(79)
(33)
(323)
(318)
(3)
(39)

$

120,661

$

(530)

$

6,928

$

(153)

$

127,589

$

(683)

Bank of America 2022 159

The remaining contractual maturity distribution and yields of the Corporation’s debt securities carried at fair value and HTM debt
securities at December 31, 2022 are summarized in the table below. Actual duration and yields may differ as prepayments on the
loans underlying the MBS or other ABS are passed through to the Corporation.

Maturities of Debt Securities Carried at Fair Value and Held-to-maturity Debt Securities
Due in One
Year or Less
(Dollars in millions)

Amount

Yield

Due after One Year
through Five Years
(1)

Amount

Yield

(1)

Due after Five Years
through Ten Years
Amount

Yield

Due after
Ten Years

(1)

Amount

$ 25,145

Total

Yield (1)

Amount

Yield (1)

Amortized cost of debt securities carried at fair value
Mortgage-backed securities:
Agency

—

—%

56

4.39 %

Agency-collateralized mortgage obligations

$

—

—

10

2.60

—

—

2,442

2.89

2,452

2.89

Commercial

22

2.09

670

3.07

4,591

2.03

1,624

2.31

6,907

2.20

Non-agency residential

—

—

—

—

—

—

825

9.54

825

9.54

22

2.09

683

3.08

4,647

2.06

30,036

3.44

35,388

3.25

3,306

1.59

79,618

1.68

78,378

1.64

32

3.38

161,334

1.66

Total mortgage-backed securities
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Non-U.S. securities

3

5.67 %

$

3.37 %

$ 25,204

3.37 %

17,499

2.41

3,002

4.58

723

3.93

279

6.87

21,503

2.82

2,034

4.77

2,102

4.85

455

3.46

137

3.35

4,728

4.64

890

3.36

4,765

3.55

2,022

3.73

3,841

3.88

11,518

3.68

$ 23,751

2.53

$ 90,170

1.96

$ 86,225

1.74

$ 34,325

3.52

$ 234,471

2.16

2.64 %

$503,219

2.13 %

$503,233

Other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total amortized cost of debt securities carried at
fair value

$

Amortized cost of HTM debt securities
Agency mortgage-backed securities

$

U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Other taxable securities
Total amortized cost of HTM debt securities

—

—%

—

—

38

9.06

$

38

9.06

$

—

$

$

—

—%

4,544

1.80

1,251
5,795

$

14

117,053

1.37

—

—

2.23

313

1.89

$ 117,380

3.00

6,431

1.37

$ 509,650

2.13 %

121,597

1.39

2.45

8,033

2.47

2.13

$ 632,863

1.99

Debt securities carried at fair value
Mortgage-backed securities:
Agency

56

$ 23,383

$ 23,442

Agency-collateralized mortgage obligations

—

10

—

2,211

2,221

Commercial

22

650

4,342

1,404

6,418

Non-agency residential

—

2

—

751

753

22

665

4,398

27,749

32,834

Total mortgage-backed securities
U.S. Treasury and government agencies

3

$

3,312

79,013

77,228

30

159,583

17,709

2,960

723

279

21,671

2,028

2,085

413

122

4,648

887

4,729

1,997

3,645

11,258

$ 23,958

$ 89,452

$ 84,759

$ 31,825

$ 229,994

$

$

$

Non-U.S. securities
Other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total debt securities carried at fair value

$

Fair value of HTM debt securities
Agency mortgage-backed securities
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Other taxable securities
Total fair value of HTM debt securities
(1)

$

13

$415,901

$415,914

—

—

4,164

97,174

—

101,338

38

1,170

295

5,512

7,015

5,334

$ 97,482

$ 421,413

$ 524,267

38

$

—

The weighted-average yield is computed based on a constant effective interest rate over the contractual life of each security. The average yield considers the contractual coupon and the
amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts, excluding the effect of related hedging derivatives.

160 Bank of America 2022

NOTE 5 Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses
The following tables present total outstanding loans and leases and an aging analysis for the Consumer Real Estate, Credit Card
and Other Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments, by class of financing receivables, at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

30-59 Days
Past Due (1)

60-89 Days
Past Due (1)

(Dollars in millions)

Consumer real estate
Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card and other consumer
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer (2)
Other consumer
Total consumer
Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value
option (3)
Total consumer loans and leases
Commercial
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate (4)
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial (5)
Total commercial
Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value
option (3)
Total commercial loans and leases
Total loans and leases (6)
Percentage of outstandings
(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)

$

1,077
88

$

245
32

Loans
Accounted
for Under
the Fair
Value
Option

Total
Current or
90 Days or
Total Past
Less Than
More
Due 30 Days
30 Days
(1)
Past Due
or More
Past Due (1)
December 31, 2022
$

945
211

$

2,267
331

$ 227,403
26,232

$ 229,670
26,563
93,421
106,236
156
456,046

466
204
—
1,835

322
59
—
658

717
45
—
1,918

1,505
308
—
4,411

91,916
105,928
156
451,635

1,835

658

1,918

4,411

451,635

827
317
409
49
107
1,709

288
59
81
9
63
500

330
144
77
11
356
918

1,445
520
567
69
526
3,127

357,036
123,959
69,199
13,575
17,034
580,803

500
1,158
0.11 %

918
2,836
0.27 %

$

$

1,709
3,544
0.34 %

$

$

$

Total
Outstandings

3,127
7,538
0.72 %

580,803
$1,032,438
98.73 %

339
339

339
456,385
358,481
124,479
69,766
13,644
17,560
583,930

$

5,432
5,432
5,771
0.55 %

5,432
589,362
$1,045,747
100.00 %

Consumer real estate loans 30-59 days past due includes fully-insured loans of $184 million and nonperforming loans of $155 million. Consumer real estate loans 60-89 days past due includes
fully-insured loans of $75 million and nonperforming loans of $88 million. Consumer real estate loans 90 days or more past due includes fully-insured loans of $368 million and nonperforming
loans of $788 million. Consumer real estate loans current or less than 30 days past due includes $1.6 billion, and direct/indirect consumer includes $27 million of nonperforming loans.
Total outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $51.8 billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $50.4 billion and non-U.S. consumer loans of $3.0 billion.
Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option includes residential mortgage loans of $71 million and home equity loans of $268 million. Commercial loans accounted for under the
fair value option includes U.S. commercial loans of $2.9 billion and non-U.S. commercial loans of $2.5 billion. For more information, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements and Note 21 – Fair
Value Option.
Total outstandings includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $64.9 billion and non-U.S. commercial real estate loans of $4.8 billion.
Includes Paycheck Protection Program loans.
Total outstandings includes loans and leases pledged as collateral of $18.5 billion. The Corporation also pledged $163.6 billion of loans with no related outstanding borrowings to secure
potential borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve Bank and Federal Home Loan Bank.

Bank of America 2022 161

30-59 Days
Past Due (1)

60-89 Days
Past Due (1)

$

$

(Dollars in millions)

Consumer real estate
Residential mortgage
Home equity
Credit card and other consumer
Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer (2)
Other consumer
Total consumer
Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value
option (3)
Total consumer loans and leases
Commercial
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate (4)
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial (5)
Total commercial
Commercial loans accounted for under the fair value
option (3)
Total commercial loans and leases
Total loans and leases (6)
Percentage of outstandings
(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)

1,005
123

297
69

Total
Total Past
Current or
90 Days or
Due 30
Less Than
More
Days
30 Days
Past Due (1)
or More
Past Due (1)
December 31, 2021
$

1,571
369

$

Loans
Accounted
for Under
the Fair
Value Option

2,873
561

$ 219,090
27,374

$ 221,963
27,935
81,438
103,560
190
435,086

298
147
—
1,573

212
52
—
630

487
18
—
2,445

997
217
—
4,648

80,441
103,343
190
430,438

1,573

630

2,445

4,648

430,438

815
148
115
104
129
1,311

308
20
34
28
259
649

396
83
285
13
89
866

1,519
251
434
145
477
2,826

324,417
113,015
62,575
14,680
18,706
533,393

649
1,279
0.13 %

866
3,311
0.34 %

$

$

1,311
2,884
0.29 %

$

$

$

Total
Outstandings

2,826
7,474
0.76 %

533,393
$ 963,831
98.44 %

618
618

618
435,704
325,936
113,266
63,009
14,825
19,183
536,219

$

7,201
7,201
7,819
0.80 %

7,201
543,420
$ 979,124
100.00 %

Consumer real estate loans 30-59 days past due includes fully-insured loans of $164 million and nonperforming loans of $118 million. Consumer real estate loans 60-89 days past due includes
fully-insured loans of $89 million and nonperforming loans of $100 million. Consumer real estate loans 90 days or more past due includes fully-insured loans of $633 million and nonperforming
loans of $1.3 billion. Consumer real estate loans current or less than 30 days past due includes $1.4 billion, and direct/indirect consumer includes $55 million of nonperforming loans.
Total outstandings primarily includes auto and specialty lending loans and leases of $48.5 billion, U.S. securities-based lending loans of $51.1 billion and non-U.S. consumer loans of $3.0 billion.
Consumer loans accounted for under the fair value option includes residential mortgage loans of $279 million and home equity loans of $339 million. Commercial loans accounted for under the
fair value option includes U.S. commercial loans of $4.6 billion and non-U.S. commercial loans of $2.6 billion. For more information, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements and Note 21 – Fair
Value Option.
Total outstandings includes U.S. commercial real estate loans of $58.2 billion and non-U.S. commercial real estate loans of $4.8 billion.
Includes Paycheck Protection Program loans.
Total outstandings includes loans and leases pledged as collateral of $13.0 billion. The Corporation also pledged $146.6 billion of loans with no related outstanding borrowings to secure
potential borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve Bank and Federal Home Loan Bank.

The Corporation has entered into long-term credit protection
agreements with FNMA and FHLMC on loans totaling $9.5 billion
and $10.5 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021, providing
full credit protection on residential mortgage loans that become
severely delinquent. All of these loans are individually insured,
and therefore the Corporation does not record an allowance for
credit losses related to these loans.

Nonperforming Loans and Leases
Commercial nonperforming loans decreased to $1.1 billion at
December 31, 2022 from $1.6 billion at December 31, 2021,
as paydowns and returns to performing status more than offset
new downgrades to nonaccrual status. Consumer nonperforming
loans decreased to $2.8 billion at December 31, 2022 from

162 Bank of America 2022

$3.0 billion at December 31, 2021 primarily due to decreases
from consumer real estate loan sales, partially offset by
increases from loans whose prior-period deferrals expired and
were modified in TDRs during the first quarter of 2022.
The following table presents the Corporation’s nonperforming
loans and leases, including nonperforming TDRs, and loans
accruing past due 90 days or more at December 31, 2022 and
2021. Nonperforming LHFS are excluded from nonperforming
loans and leases as they are recorded at either fair value or the
lower of cost or fair value. For more information on the criteria
for classification as nonperforming, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles.

Credit Quality
Nonperforming Loans
and Leases
(Dollars in millions)

Residential mortgage (1)
With no related allowance (2)
Home equity (1)
With no related allowance (2)
Credit Card
Direct/indirect consumer
Total consumer
U.S. commercial
Non-U.S. commercial
Commercial real estate
Commercial lease financing
U.S. small business commercial
Total commercial
Total nonperforming loans
Percentage of outstanding loans and leases

$

$

2022
2,167
1,973
510
393
n/a
77
2,754
553
212
271
4
14
1,054
3,808
0.37 %

$

$

Accruing Past Due
90 Days or More

December 31
2021
2022
2,284
$
368
1,950
—
630
—
414
—
n/a
717
75
2
2,989
1,087
825
190
268
25
382
46
80
8
23
355
1,578
624
4,567
$
1,711
0.47 %
0.16 %

2021
$

$

634
—
—
—
487
11
1,132
171
19
40
8
87
325
1,457
0.15 %

(1)

Residential mortgage loans accruing past due 90 days or more are fully-insured loans. At December 31, 2022 and 2021 residential mortgage included $260 million and $444 million of loans on
which interest had been curtailed by the FHA, and therefore were no longer accruing interest, although principal was still insured, and $108 million and $190 million of loans on which interest was
still accruing.
(2)
Primarily relates to loans for which the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral less any costs to sell is greater than the amortized cost of the loans as of the reporting date.
n/a = not applicable

Credit Quality Indicators
The Corporation monitors credit quality within its Consumer Real
Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial
portfolio segments based on primary credit quality indicators.
For more information on the portfolio segments, see Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles. Within the
Consumer Real Estate portfolio segment, the primary credit
quality indicators are refreshed LTV and refreshed Fair Isaac
Corporation (FICO) score. Refreshed LTV measures the carrying
value of the loan as a percentage of the value of the property
securing the loan, refreshed quarterly. Home equity loans are
evaluated using CLTV, which measures the carrying value of the
Corporation’s loan and available line of credit combined with any
outstanding senior liens against the property as a percentage of
the value of the property securing the loan, refreshed quarterly.
FICO score measures the creditworthiness of the borrower
based on the financial obligations of the borrower and the
borrower’s credit history. FICO scores are typically refreshed
quarterly or more frequently. Certain borrowers (e.g., borrowers
that have had debts discharged in a bankruptcy proceeding) may
not have their FICO scores updated. FICO scores are also a

primary credit quality indicator for the Credit Card and Other
Consumer portfolio segment and the business card portfolio
within U.S. small business commercial. Within the Commercial
portfolio segment, loans are evaluated using the internal
classifications of pass rated or reservable criticized as the
primary credit quality indicators. The term reservable criticized
refers to those commercial loans that are internally classified or
listed by the Corporation as Special Mention, Substandard or
Doubtful, which are asset quality categories defined by
regulatory authorities. These assets have an elevated level of
risk and may have a high probability of default or total loss.
Pass rated refers to all loans not considered reservable
criticized. In addition to these primary credit quality indicators,
the Corporation uses other credit quality indicators for certain
types of loans.
The following tables present certain credit quality indicators
and gross charge-offs for the Corporation's Consumer Real
Estate, Credit Card and Other Consumer, and Commercial
portfolio segments by year of origination, except for revolving
loans and revolving loans that were modified into term loans,
which are shown on an aggregate basis at December 31, 2022.

Bank of America 2022 163

Residential Mortgage – Credit Quality Indicators By Vintage
Term Loans by Origination Year
Total as of
December 31,
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Residential Mortgage
Refreshed LTV
Less than or equal to 90 percent
Greater than 90 percent but less than or equal to 100
percent
Greater than 100 percent
Fully-insured loans
Total Residential Mortgage
Residential Mortgage
Refreshed FICO score
Less than 620
Greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680
Greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740
Greater than or equal to 740
Fully-insured loans
Total Residential Mortgage
Gross charge-offs

2022

$

215,713

$

1,615
648
11,694
229,670

$

$
$

$

39,625

$

950
374
580
41,529

$

2,156
4,978
25,444
185,398
11,694
229,670
161

2021

377
1,011
5,411
34,150
580
41,529
—

$
$

2020

$

81,437

$

530
169
3,667
85,803

$

518
1,382
8,290
71,946
3,667
85,803
6

$
$

2019

$

37,228

$

93
43
3,102
40,466

$

373
840
4,369
31,782
3,102
40,466
5

$
$

$

18,980

$

15
15
949
19,959

$

124
329
2,187
16,370
949
19,959
6

$
$

2018

Prior

$

5,734

$

8
8
156
5,906

$

84
233
830
4,603
156
5,906
1

$
$

$

32,709

$

19
39
3,240
36,007

$

680
1,183
4,357
26,547
3,240
36,007
143

$
$

Home Equity - Credit Quality Indicators
Home Equity Loans
and Reverse
Mortgages (1)
Revolving Loans
December 31, 2022

Total
(Dollars in millions)

Home Equity
Refreshed LTV
Less than or equal to 90 percent
Greater than 90 percent but less than or equal to 100 percent
Greater than 100 percent
Total Home Equity

$

$

Home Equity
Refreshed FICO score
Less than 620
Greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680
Greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740
Greater than or equal to 740
Total Home Equity
Gross charge-offs
(1)

$

$
$

26,395
62
106
26,563

$

683
1,190
4,321
20,369
26,563
45

$

$

$
$

1,304
20
37
1,361

$

166
152
312
731
1,361
5

$

$

$
$

Revolving Loans
Converted to Term
Loans

19,960
24
35
20,019

$

189
507
2,747
16,576
20,019
24

$

5,131
18
34
5,183

$

328
531
1,262
3,062
5,183
16

$
$

Includes reverse mortgages of $937 million and home equity loans of $424 million, which are no longer originated.

Credit Card and Direct/Indirect Consumer – Credit Quality Indicators By Vintage
Direct/Indirect
Term Loans by Origination Year

(Dollars in millions)
Refreshed FICO score
Less than 620
Greater than or equal to 620
and less than 680
Greater than or equal to 680
and less than 740
Greater than or equal to 740
Other internal credit
metrics (2,3)
Total credit card and other
consumer
Gross charge-offs
(1)
(2)
(3)

Total Direct/
Indirect as of
December 31,
2022

Revolving
Loans

$

$

847

12

2022
$

237

2021
$

301

2020
$

113

Credit Card

2019
$

84

2018
$

43

Prior
$

57

Total Credit
Card as of
December 31,
2022

Revolving
Loans

Revolving
Loans
Converted
to Term
Loans (1)

$

$

$

4,056

3,866

190

2,521

12

1,108

816

269

150

69

97

10,994

10,805

189

8,895
39,679

52
83

4,091
16,663

2,730
11,392

992
5,630

520
2,992

214
1,236

296
1,683

32,186
46,185

32,017
46,142

169
43

54,294

53,404

259

305

70

57

40

159

—

—

—

$

106,236

$ 53,563

$ 22,358

$ 15,544

$

7,074

$

3,803

$

1,602

$

2,292

$

93,421

$ 92,830

$

591

$

232

$

$

$

$

34

$

27

$

14

$

40

$

1,985

$

$

76

7

31

79

1,909

Represents TDRs that were modified into term loans.
Other internal credit metrics may include delinquency status, geography or other factors.
Direct/indirect consumer includes $53.4 billion of securities-based lending, which is typically supported by highly liquid collateral with market value greater than or equal to the outstanding loan
balance and therefore has minimal credit risk at December 31, 2022.

164 Bank of America 2022

Commercial – Credit Quality Indicators By Vintage (1)
Term Loans
Amortized Cost Basis by Origination Year

(Dollars in millions)
U.S. Commercial
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total U.S. Commercial
Gross charge-offs
Non-U.S. Commercial
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total Non-U.S. Commercial
Gross charge-offs
Commercial Real Estate
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total Commercial Real Estate
Gross charge-offs
Commercial Lease Financing
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total Commercial Lease Financing
Gross charge-offs
U.S. Small Business Commercial (2)
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total U.S. Small Business Commercial
Gross charge-offs
Total
Total gross charge-offs
(1)
(2)

Total as of
December 31,
2022

$
$
$

$
$
$

$
$
$

2022

348,447
10,034
358,481
151

$

121,890
2,589
124,479
41

$

64,619
5,147
69,766
75

$

61,200
278
61,478
2

$

24,839
45
24,884
—

$

15,290
11
15,301
—

$

3,255
9
3,264
—

$

1,825
11
1,836
—

$

$ 106,763
$
2

$
$

$
$

$
$

13,404
240
13,644
8

$

$

$
$

8,726
329
9,055
31

$
$

575,425
306

$
$
$

$

2021

$
$

$
$

2020

39,717
794
40,511
24

$

19,098
395
19,493
3

$

13,089
837
13,926
—

$

2,757
35
2,792
4

$

$

$
$

1,953
35
1,988
1

$
$

78,710
32

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

2019

18,609
697
19,306
24

$

5,183
331
5,514
1

$

5,756
545
6,301
6

$

$
$

$
$

$
$

1,955
12
1,967
—

$

$

$
$

1,408
48
1,456
11

$
$

34,544
42

$
$

2018

16,566
884
17,450
9

$

3,882
325
4,207
—

$

9,013
1,501
10,514
—

$

$
$

$
$

$
$

8,749
1,202
9,951
6

$

2,423
98
2,521
37

$

4,384
1,151
5,535
26

$

1,301
50
1,351
—

$

$

1,578
71
1,649
4

$

$

$
$

864
76
940
4

$
$

624
51
675
1

$
$

34,760
17

$
$

20,033
70

$
$

$
$

Prior

$
$

30,282
856
31,138
13

Revolving
Loans

$ 173,324
5,323
$ 178,647
$
73

4,697
475
5,172
—

$

8,606
1,017
9,623
43

$

2,558
63
2,621
—

$

$

$
$

1,925
105
2,030
6

$
$

50,584
62

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

$
$

61,768
920
62,688
—

8,481
85
8,566
—

—
—
—
—

127
3
130
8

$ 250,031
$
81

Excludes $5.4 billion of loans accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2022.
Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans of $8.5 billion. Refreshed FICO scores for this portfolio are $297 million for less than 620; $859 million for greater than or equal to 620 and less than
680; $2.4 billion for greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740; and $5.0 billion greater than or equal to 740. Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans gross charge-offs of $172 million.

Bank of America 2022 165

The following tables present certain credit quality indicators for the Corporation's Consumer Real Estate, Credit Card and Other
Consumer, and Commercial portfolio segments by year of origination, except for revolving loans and revolving loans that were
modified into term loans, which are shown on an aggregate basis at December 31, 2021.

Residential Mortgage – Credit Quality Indicators By Vintage
Term Loans by Origination Year

(Dollars in millions)

Residential Mortgage
Refreshed LTV
Less than or equal to 90 percent
Greater than 90 percent but less than or equal to 100
percent
Greater than 100 percent
Fully-insured loans
Total Residential Mortgage
Residential Mortgage
Refreshed FICO score
Less than 620
Greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680
Greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740
Greater than or equal to 740
Fully-insured loans
Total Residential Mortgage

Total as of
December 31,
2021

$

206,562

$

1,938
759
12,704
221,963

$

$

2,451
5,199
24,532
177,077
12,704
221,963

2021

2020

$

87,051

$

1,401
520
3,845
92,817

$

636
1,511
8,822
78,003
3,845
92,817

$

2019

$

43,597

$

331
112
3,486
47,526

$

$

442
1,123
5,454
37,021
3,486
47,526

$

23,205

$

81
29
1,150
24,465

$

$

140
477
2,785
19,913
1,150
24,465

2018

$

7,392

$

17
11
216
7,636

$

120
294
1,057
5,949
216
7,636

$

2017

Prior

$

10,956

$

14
12
235
11,217

$

$

104
307
1,434
9,137
235
11,217

$

34,361

$

94
75
3,772
38,302

$

$

1,009
1,487
4,980
27,054
3,772
38,302

Home Equity - Credit Quality Indicators

Total
(Dollars in millions)

Home Equity
Refreshed LTV
Less than or equal to 90 percent
Greater than 90 percent but less than or equal to 100 percent
Greater than 100 percent
Total Home Equity
Home Equity
Refreshed FICO score
Less than 620
Greater than or equal to 620 and less than 680
Greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740
Greater than or equal to 740
Total Home Equity
(1)

$

$

$

$

27,594
130
211
27,935

893
1,434
4,625
20,983
27,935

Includes reverse mortgages of $1.3 billion and home equity loans of $582 million, which are no longer originated.

166 Bank of America 2022

Home Equity Loans
and Reverse
Mortgages (1)
Revolving Loans
December 31, 2021

$

$

$

$

1,773
55
85
1,913

244
222
468
979
1,913

$

$

$

$

19,095
34
54
19,183

209
495
2,493
15,986
19,183

Revolving Loans
Converted to Term
Loans

$

$

$

$

6,726
41
72
6,839

440
717
1,664
4,018
6,839

Credit Card and Direct/Indirect Consumer – Credit Quality Indicators By Vintage
Direct/Indirect
Term Loans by Origination Year

(Dollars in millions)
Refreshed FICO score
Less than 620
Greater than or equal to 620
and less than 680
Greater than or equal to 680
and less than 740
Greater than or equal to 740
Other internal credit
metrics (2, 3)
Total credit card and other
consumer
(1)
(2)
(3)

Total Direct/
Indirect as of
December 31,
2021

Revolving
Loans

$

$

685

13

2,313

$

14

2021
$

2020

179

$

115

1,170

2019
$

Credit Card

2018

129

414

313

$

2017

79

$

148

Prior

101

$

69

134

Total Credit
Card as of
December 31,
2021

Revolving
Loans

Revolving
Loans
Converted
to Term
Loans (1)

$

$

$

3,017

2,857

160

120

9,264

9,064

200

8,530

60

4,552

1,659

1,126

466

314

353

28,347

28,155

192

37,164

94

15,876

8,642

6,465

2,679

1,573

1,835

40,810

40,762

48

54,868

54,173

283

53

77

75

63

144

—

—

—

103,560

$ 54,354

$ 22,060

$ 10,883

81,438

$ 80,838

$

8,110

$

3,447

$

2,185

$

2,521

$

$

600

Represents TDRs that were modified into term loans.
Other internal credit metrics may include delinquency status, geography or other factors.
Direct/indirect consumer includes $54.2 billion of securities-based lending, which is typically supported by highly liquid collateral with market value greater than or equal to the outstanding loan
balance and therefore has minimal credit risk at December 31, 2021.

Commercial – Credit Quality Indicators By Vintage (1)
Term Loans
Amortized Cost Basis by Origination Year

(Dollars in millions)
U.S. Commercial
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total U.S. Commercial

Total as of
December 31,
2021

$
$

Non-U.S. Commercial
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total Non-U.S. Commercial

$

Commercial Real Estate
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total Commercial Real Estate

$

Commercial Lease Financing
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total Commercial Lease Financing

$

U.S. Small Business Commercial (2)
Risk ratings
Pass rated
Reservable criticized
Total U.S. Small Business Commercial
Total
(1)
(2)

$

$

$

$
$
$

2021

315,618
10,318
325,936

$

110,787
2,479
113,266

$

55,511
7,498
63,009

$

14,438
387
14,825

$

11,618
433
12,051
529,087

$

2020

55,862
598
56,460

$

25,749
223
25,972

$

14,402
277
14,679

$

3,280
25
3,305

$

4,257
12
$
4,269
$ 104,685

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$
$

2019

25,012
687
25,699

$

8,703
324
9,027

$

7,244
990
8,234

$

2,485
18
2,503

$

2,922
29
2,951
48,414

$

$

$

$

$

$
$

2018

23,373
1,308
24,681

$

7,133
487
7,620

$

11,237
2,237
13,474

$

$

$

$

2,427
91
2,518

$

1,059
91
1,150
49,443

$

$

$
$

2017

11,439
1,615
13,054

$

4,521
275
4,796

$

5,710
1,710
7,420

$

$

$

$

2,030
67
2,097

$

763
87
850
28,217

$

$

$
$

Prior

10,426
514
10,940

$

3,016
257
3,273

$

3,326
596
3,922

$

$

$

$

1,741
48
1,789

$

623
64
687
20,611

$

$

$
$

23,877
1,072
24,949

Revolving
Loans

$ 165,629
4,524
$ 170,153

3,062
216
3,278

$

6,831
1,464
8,295

$

$

$

2,475
138
2,613

$

1,853
147
2,000
41,135

$

$

58,603
697
59,300

6,761
224
6,985

—
—
—

141
3
$
144
$ 236,582

Excludes $7.2 billion of loans accounted for under the fair value option at December 31, 2021.
Excludes U.S. Small Business Card loans of $7.1 billion. Refreshed FICO scores for this portfolio are $192 million for less than 620; $618 million for greater than or equal to 620 and less than
680; $1.9 billion for greater than or equal to 680 and less than 740; and $4.4 billion greater than or equal to 740.

Bank of America 2022 167

During 2022, commercial credit quality showed some signs
of stabilization. Commercial reservable criticized utilized
exposure decreased to $19.3 billion at December 31, 2022
from $22.4 billion (to 3.12 percent from 3.91 percent of total
commercial reservable utilized exposure) at December 31,
2021, which was broad-based across industries.

Troubled Debt Restructurings
Consumer Real Estate
Modifications of consumer real estate loans are classified as
TDRs when the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties and
a concession has been granted. Concessions may include
reductions in interest rates, capitalization of past due amounts,
principal and/or interest forbearance, payment extensions,
principal and/or interest forgiveness, or combinations thereof.
Prior to permanently modifying a loan, the Corporation may enter
into trial modifications with certain borrowers under both
government and proprietary programs. Trial modifications
generally represent a three- to four-month period during which
the borrower makes monthly payments under the anticipated
modified payment terms. Upon successful completion of the
trial period, the Corporation and the borrower enter into a
permanent modification. Binding trial modifications are
classified as TDRs when the trial offer is made and continue to
be classified as TDRs regardless of whether the borrower enters
into a permanent modification.
Consumer real estate loans of $211 million that have been
discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with no change in

repayment terms and not reaffirmed by the borrower were
included in TDRs at December 31, 2022, of which $53 million
were classified as nonperforming and $33 million were loans
fully insured.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, remaining commitments
to lend additional funds to debtors whose terms have been
modified in a consumer real estate TDR were not significant.
Consumer real estate foreclosed properties totaled $121 million
and $101 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The
carrying value of consumer real estate loans, including fullyinsured loans, for which formal foreclosure proceedings were in
process at December 31, 2022 and 2021 was $871 million
and $1.1 billion. During 2022 and 2021, the Corporation
reclassified $190 million and $64 million of consumer real
estate loans to foreclosed properties or, for properties acquired
upon foreclosure of certain government-guaranteed loans
(principally FHA-insured loans), to other assets. The
reclassifications represent non-cash investing activities and,
accordingly, are not reflected in the Consolidated Statement of
Cash Flows.
The table below presents the December 31, 2022, 2021
and 2020 unpaid principal balance, carrying value, and average
pre- and post-modification interest rates of consumer real estate
loans that were modified in TDRs during 2022, 2021 and 2020.
The following Consumer Real Estate portfolio segment tables
include loans that were initially classified as TDRs during the
period and also loans that had previously been classified as
TDRs and were modified again during the period.

Consumer Real Estate – TDRs Entered into During 2022, 2021 and 2020
Unpaid
Principal
Balance
(Dollars in millions)

Residential mortgage
Home equity
Total

Residential mortgage
Home equity
Total

Residential mortgage
Home equity
Total
(1)

$
$

$
$

$
$

1,144
238
1,382

891
107
998

732
87
819

PreCarrying
Modification
Value
Interest Rate
December 31, 2022
$
1,015
3.52 %
191
4.61
$
1,206
3.71

$
$

$
$

PostModification
Interest Rate (1)
3.40 %
4.65
3.62

December 31, 2021
788
3.48 %
77
3.60
865
3.49

3.38 %
3.59
3.41

December 31, 2020
646
3.66 %
69
3.67
715
3.66

3.59 %
3.61
3.59

The post-modification interest rate reflects the interest rate applicable only to permanently completed modifications, which exclude loans that are in a trial modification period.

The table below presents the December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 carrying value for consumer real estate loans that were
modified in a TDR during 2022, 2021 and 2020, by type of modification.

Consumer Real Estate – Modification Programs

Modifications under government programs
Modifications under proprietary programs
Loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy (1)
Trial modifications
Total modifications
(1)

TDRs Entered into During
2021
4 $
2 $
774
1,100
33
14
54
90
865 $
1,206 $

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

2020
13
570
53
79
715

Includes loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with no change in repayment terms that are classified as TDRs.

The following table presents the carrying value of consumer real estate loans that entered into payment default during 2022,
2021 and 2020 that were modified in a TDR during the 12 months preceding payment default. A payment default for consumer real
estate TDRs is recognized when a borrower has missed three monthly payments (not necessarily consecutively) since modification.

168 Bank of America 2022

Consumer Real Estate – TDRs Entering Payment Default that were Modified During the Preceding 12 Months
Modifications under government programs
Modifications under proprietary programs
Loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy (1)
Trial modifications (2)
Total modifications
(1)
(2)

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

—
189
2
25
216

$

2020
4
128
9
19
160

$

$

16
51
19
54
140

$

Includes loans discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with no change in repayment terms that are classified as TDRs.
Includes trial modification offers to which the customer did not respond.

Credit Card and Other Consumer
The Corporation seeks to assist customers who are
experiencing financial difficulty by modifying loans while
ensuring compliance with federal and local laws and guidelines.
Credit card and other consumer loan modifications generally
involve reducing the interest rate on the account, placing the
customer on a fixed payment plan not exceeding 60 months and
canceling the customer’s available line of credit, all of which are
considered TDRs. The Corporation makes loan modifications
directly with borrowers for debt held only by the Corporation
(internal programs). Additionally, the Corporation makes loan
modifications for borrowers working with third-party renegotiation

agencies that provide solutions to customers’ entire unsecured
debt structures (external programs). The Corporation classifies
other secured consumer loans that have been discharged in
Chapter 7 bankruptcy as TDRs, which are written down to
collateral value and placed on nonaccrual status no later than
the time of discharge.
The table below provides information on the Corporation’s
Credit Card and Other Consumer TDR portfolio including the
December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 unpaid principal balance,
carrying value, and average pre- and post-modification interest
rates of loans that were modified in TDRs during 2022, 2021
and 2020.

Credit Card and Other Consumer – TDRs Entered into During 2022, 2021 and 2020
Unpaid
Principal
Balance
(Dollars in millions)

Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Total

$

Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Total

$

Credit card
Direct/Indirect consumer
Total
(1)

284
6
290

$

237
23
260

$

$

269
52
321

$

PreCarrying
Modification
(1)
Value
Interest Rate
December 31, 2022
$
293
22.34 %
5
5.51
$
298
22.06

$
$

$
$

PostModification
Interest Rate
3.89 %
5.50
3.92

December 31, 2021
248
18.45 %
16
5.88
264
17.68

4.09 %
5.88
4.20

December 31, 2020
277
18.16 %
37
5.83
314
16.70

5.63 %
5.83
5.65

Includes accrued interest and fees.

The table below presents the December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 carrying value for Credit Card and Other Consumer loans that
were modified in a TDR during 2022, 2021 and 2020 by program type.

Credit Card and Other Consumer – TDRs by Program Type at December 31 (1)
Internal programs
External programs
Other
Total
(1)

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

251
44
3
298

$

$

2020
214
44
6
264

$

$

225
73
16
314

Includes accrued interest and fees.

Credit card and other consumer loans are deemed to be in
payment default during the quarter in which a borrower misses
the second of two consecutive payments. Payment defaults are
one of the factors considered when projecting future cash flows
in the calculation of the allowance for loan and lease losses for
credit card and other consumer. Based on historical experience,
the Corporation estimates that 15 percent of new credit card
TDRs and 15 percent of new direct/indirect consumer TDRs may
be in payment default within 12 months after modification.

Commercial Loans
Modifications of loans to commercial borrowers that are
experiencing financial difficulty are designed to reduce the
Corporation’s loss exposure while providing the borrower with an
opportunity to work through financial difficulties, often to avoid
foreclosure or bankruptcy. Each modification is unique and
reflects the individual circumstances of the borrower.
Modifications that result in a TDR may include extensions of
maturity at a concessionary (below market) rate of interest,
payment forbearances or other actions designed to benefit the
borrower while mitigating the Corporation’s risk exposure.

Bank of America 2022 169

Reductions in interest rates are rare. Instead, the interest rates
are typically increased, although the increased rate may not
represent a market rate of interest. Infrequently, concessions
may also include principal forgiveness in connection with
foreclosure, short sale or other settlement agreements leading
to termination or sale of the loan.
At the time of restructuring, the loans are remeasured to
reflect the impact, if any, on projected cash flows resulting from
the modified terms. If a portion of the loan is deemed to be
uncollectible, a charge-off may be recorded at the time of
restructuring. Alternatively, a charge-off may have already been
recorded in a previous period such that no charge-off is required
at the time of modification.
During 2022, the carrying value of the Corporation’s
commercial loans that were modified as TDRs was $1.9 billion
compared to $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion for 2021 and 2020. At
December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation had
commitments to lend $358 million, $283 million and $402
million to commercial borrowers whose loans were classified as
TDRs. The balance of commercial TDRs in payment default was
$105 million, $262 million and $218 million at December 31,
2022, 2021 and 2020.

Loans Held-for-sale
The Corporation had LHFS of $6.9 billion and $15.6 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. Cash and non-cash proceeds
from sales and paydowns of loans originally classified as LHFS
were $32.0 billion, $43.6 billion and $20.1 billion for 2022,
2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used for originations and
purchases of LHFS totaled $24.9 billion, $37.3 billion and
$19.7 billion for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Also
included were non-cash net transfers into LHFS of $1.9 billion
during 2022, primarily driven by the transfer of a $1.6 billion
affinity card loan portfolio to held for sale that was sold in
October 2022, and $808 million during 2021.

Accrued Interest Receivable
Accrued interest receivable for loans and leases and loans heldfor-sale at December 31, 2022 and 2021 was $3.8 billion and
$2.2 billion and is reported in customer and other receivables
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Outstanding credit card loan balances include unpaid
principal, interest and fees. Credit card loans are not classified
as nonperforming but are charged off no later than the end of
the month in which the account becomes 180 days past due,
within 60 days after receipt of notification of death or
bankruptcy, or upon confirmation of fraud. During 2022 and
2021, the Corporation reversed $332 million and $446 million
of interest and fee income against the income statement line
item in which it was originally recorded upon charge-off of the
principal balance of the loan.
For the outstanding residential mortgage, home equity,
direct/indirect consumer and commercial loan balances
classified as nonperforming during 2022 and 2021, interest and
fee income reversed at the time the loans were classified as
nonperforming was not significant. For more information on the
Corporation's nonperforming loan policies, see Note 1 –
Summary of Significant Accounting Principles.

Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses is estimated using quantitative
and qualitative methods that consider a variety of factors, such
as historical loss experience, the current credit quality of the
portfolio and an economic outlook over the life of the loan.
Qualitative reserves cover losses that are expected but, in the
Corporation's assessment, may not be adequately reflected in

170 Bank of America 2022

the quantitative methods or the economic assumptions. The
Corporation incorporates forward-looking information through the
use of several macroeconomic scenarios in determining the
weighted economic outlook over the forecasted life of the
assets. These scenarios include key macroeconomic variables
such as gross domestic product, unemployment rate, real
estate prices and corporate bond spreads. The scenarios that
are chosen each quarter and the weighting given to each
scenario depend on a variety of factors including recent
economic events, leading economic indicators, internal and
third-party economist views, and industry trends. For more
information on the Corporation's credit loss accounting policies
including the allowance for credit losses, see Note 1 – Summary
of Significant Accounting Principles.
The December 31, 2022 estimate for allowance for credit
losses was based on various economic scenarios, including a
baseline scenario derived from consensus estimates, an
adverse scenario reflecting an extended moderate recession, a
downside scenario reflecting persistent inflation and interest
rates above the baseline scenario, a tail risk scenario similar to
the severely adverse scenario used in stress testing and an
upside scenario that considers the potential for improvement
above the baseline scenario. The overall economic outlook is
weighted 95 percent towards a recessionary environment in
2023, with continued inflationary pressures leading to lower
GDP and higher unemployment rate expectations as compared
to the prior year. The weighted economic outlook assumes that
the U.S. average unemployment rate will be above five and a
half percent by the fourth quarter of 2023 and will slowly decline
to five percent by the fourth quarter of 2024. Additionally, in this
economic outlook, U.S. gross domestic product is forecasted to
contract at 0.4 percent and grow at 1.2 percent year-over-year in
the fourth quarters of 2023 and 2024. For comparison, as of
December 31, 2021, the weighted economic outlook for the
U.S. average unemployment rate was forecasted to be just
above five percent by the fourth quarter of 2022 and slowly
decline to just under five percent by the fourth quarter of 2023
and U.S. gross domestic product was forecasted at 2.1 percent
and 1.9 percent year-over-year in the fourth quarters of 2022
and 2023.
The allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2022 was
$14.2 billion, an increase of $379 million compared to
December 31, 2021. The increase in the allowance for credit
losses was primarily driven by loan growth and a dampened
macroeconomic outlook, partially offset by a reserve release for
reduced pandemic uncertainties. The change in the allowance
for credit losses was comprised of a net increase of $295
million in the allowance for loan and lease losses and an
increase of $84 million in the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments. The increase in the allowance for credit losses
was attributed to increases in the credit card and other
consumer portfolios of $341 million, and commercial portfolio of
$177 million, partially offset by a decrease in the consumer real
estate portfolio of $139 million. The provision for credit losses
increased $7.1 billion to an expense of $2.5 billion in 2022
compared to a benefit of $4.6 billion in 2021 and an expense of
$11.3 billion in 2020. The increase in the provision for credit
losses in 2022 was primarily driven by loan growth and a
dampened macroeconomic outlook, partially offset by reduced
pandemic uncertainties. The benefit in 2021 was primarily due
to an improved macroeconomic outlook and credit quality.
Outstanding loans and leases excluding loans accounted for
under the fair value option increased $68.7 billion in 2022
primarily driven by commercial loans, which increased $47.7
billion, driven by broad-based growth, and consumer loans which

increased $21.0 billion, primarily driven by credit card and
residential mortgage.

The changes in the allowance for credit losses, including net
charge-offs and provision for loan and lease losses, are detailed
in the table below.
Consumer
Real Estate

(Dollars in millions)

Allowance for loan and lease losses, January 1
Loans and leases charged off
Recoveries of loans and leases previously charged off
Net charge-offs
Provision for loan and lease losses
Other
Allowance for loan and lease losses, December 31
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, January 1
Provision for unfunded lending commitments
Other
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, December 31
Allowance for credit losses, December 31

Allowance for loan and lease losses, January 1
Loans and leases charged off
Recoveries of loans and leases previously charged off
Net charge-offs
Provision for loan and lease losses
Other
Allowance for loan and lease losses, December 31
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, January 1
Provision for unfunded lending commitments
Other
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, December 31
Allowance for credit losses, December 31

Allowance for loan and lease losses, January 1
Loans and leases charged off
Recoveries of loans and leases previously charged off
Net charge-offs
Provision for loan and lease losses
Other
Allowance for loan and lease losses, December 31
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, January 1
Provision for unfunded lending commitments
Reserve for unfunded lending commitments, December 31
Allowance for credit losses, December 31

NOTE 6 Securitizations and Other Variable
Interest Entities
The Corporation utilizes VIEs in the ordinary course of business
to support its own and its customers’ financing and investing
needs. The Corporation routinely securitizes loans and debt
securities using VIEs as a source of funding for the Corporation
and as a means of transferring the economic risk of the loans or
debt securities to third parties. The assets are transferred into a
trust or other securitization vehicle such that the assets are
legally isolated from the creditors of the Corporation and are not
available to satisfy its obligations. These assets can only be
used to settle obligations of the trust or other securitization
vehicle. The Corporation also administers, structures or invests
in other VIEs including CDOs, investment vehicles and other
entities. For more information on the Corporation’s use of VIEs,
see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles.
The tables in this Note present the assets and liabilities of
consolidated and unconsolidated VIEs at December 31, 2022
and 2021 in situations where the Corporation has continuing
involvement with transferred assets or if the Corporation
otherwise has a variable interest in the VIE. The tables also

$

$

$

$

$

$

557
(206)
224
18
(164)
9
420
96
(3)
1
94
514

858
(78)
225
147
(449)
1
557
137
(41)
—
96
653

440
(98)
201
103
307
8
858
119
18
137
995

Credit Card and
Other Consumer
Commercial
2022
$
6,476 $
5,354
(2,755)
(478)
882
161
(1,873)
(317)
2,215
409
(1)
(1)
6,817
5,445
—
1,360
—
86
—
—
—
1,446
$
6,817 $
6,891

$

$

$

$

2021
9,213 $
(3,000)
1,006
(1,994)
(744)
1
6,476
—
—
—
—
6,476 $

8,731
(719)
323
(396)
(2,980)
(1)
5,354
1,741
(380)
(1)
1,360
6,714

2020
7,430 $
(3,646)
891
(2,755)
4,538
—
9,213
—
—
—
9,213 $

4,488
(1,675)
206
(1,469)
5,720
(8)
8,731
1,004
737
1,741
10,472

Total
$

$

$

$

$

$

12,387
(3,439)
1,267
(2,172)
2,460
7
12,682
1,456
83
1
1,540
14,222

18,802
(3,797)
1,554
(2,243)
(4,173)
1
12,387
1,878
(421)
(1)
1,456
13,843

12,358
(5,419)
1,298
(4,121)
10,565
—
18,802
1,123
755
1,878
20,680

present the Corporation’s maximum loss exposure at
December 31, 2022 and 2021 resulting from its involvement
with consolidated VIEs and unconsolidated VIEs in which the
Corporation holds a variable interest. The Corporation’s
maximum loss exposure is based on the unlikely event that all
of the assets in the VIEs become worthless and incorporates
not only potential losses associated with assets recorded on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet but also potential losses
associated with off-balance sheet commitments, such as
unfunded liquidity commitments and other contractual
arrangements. The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure does
not include losses previously recognized through write-downs of
assets.
The Corporation invests in ABS issued by third-party VIEs
with which it has no other form of involvement and enters into
certain commercial lending arrangements that may also
incorporate the use of VIEs, for example to hold collateral.
These securities and loans are included in Note 4 – Securities or
Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and Leases and Allowance for Credit
Losses. In addition, the Corporation has used VIEs in connection
with its funding activities.

Bank of America 2022 171

The Corporation did not provide financial support to
consolidated or unconsolidated VIEs during 2022, 2021 and
2020 that it was not previously contractually required to provide,
nor does it intend to do so.
The Corporation had liquidity commitments, including written
put options and collateral value guarantees, with certain
unconsolidated VIEs of $978 million and $968 million at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.

First-lien Mortgage Securitizations
As part of its mortgage banking activities, the Corporation
securitizes a portion of the first-lien residential mortgage loans
it originates or purchases from third parties, generally in the
form of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS)
guaranteed by government-sponsored enterprises, FNMA and
FHLMC (collectively the GSEs), or the Government National
Mortgage Association (GNMA) primarily in the case of FHA-

insured and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)guaranteed mortgage loans. Securitization usually occurs in
conjunction with or shortly after origination or purchase, and the
Corporation may also securitize loans held in its residential
mortgage portfolio. In addition, the Corporation may, from time
to time, securitize commercial mortgages it originates or
purchases from other entities. The Corporation typically services
the loans it securitizes. Further, the Corporation may retain
beneficial interests in the securitization trusts including senior
and subordinate securities and equity tranches issued by the
trusts. Except as described in Note 12 – Commitments and
Contingencies, the Corporation does not provide guarantees or
recourse to the securitization trusts other than standard
representations and warranties.
The table below summarizes select information related to
first-lien mortgage securitizations for 2022, 2021 and 2020.

First-lien Mortgage Securitizations
(Dollars in millions)

Proceeds from loan sales (1)
Gains on securitizations (2)
Repurchases from securitization trusts (3)
(1)

(2)

(3)

$

Residential Mortgage - Agency
2021
2020
2022
6,664 $
15,823
8,084 $
9
728
8
756
436
53

$

Commercial Mortgage
2021
2020
2022
10,874 $
5,084
5,853 $
156
61
46
—
—
—

The Corporation transfers residential mortgage loans to securitizations sponsored primarily by the GSEs or GNMA in the normal course of business and primarily receives residential mortgagebacked securities in exchange. Substantially all of these securities are classified as Level 2 within the fair value hierarchy and are typically sold shortly after receipt.
A majority of the first-lien residential mortgage loans securitized are initially classified as LHFS and accounted for under the fair value option. Gains recognized on these LHFS prior to
securitization, which totaled $41 million, $121 million and $160 million net of hedges, during 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively, are not included in the table above.
The Corporation may have the option to repurchase delinquent loans out of securitization trusts, which reduces the amount of servicing advances it is required to make. The Corporation may also
repurchase loans from securitization trusts to perform modifications. Repurchased loans include FHA-insured mortgages collateralizing GNMA securities.

The Corporation recognizes consumer MSRs from the sale or
securitization of consumer real estate loans. The unpaid
principal balance of loans serviced for investors, including
residential mortgage and home equity loans, totaled $100.1
billion and $115.4 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Servicing fee and ancillary fee income on serviced loans was
$274 million, $392 million and $474 million during 2022, 2021
and 2020, respectively. Servicing advances on serviced loans,
including loans serviced for others and loans held for
investment, were $1.6 billion and $2.0 billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021. For more information on MSRs, see Note 20 –
Fair Value Measurements.

172 Bank of America 2022

During 2022, the Corporation deconsolidated agency
residential mortgage securitization trusts with total assets of
$784 million, with no significant deconsolidations in 2021.
During 2020, the Corporation completed the sale of $9.3
billion of consumer real estate loans through GNMA loan
securitizations. As part of the securitizations, the Corporation
retained $8.4 billion of MBS, which are classified as debt
securities carried at fair value on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet. Total gains on loan sales of $704 million were recorded
in other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
The following table summarizes select information related to
first-lien mortgage securitization trusts in which the Corporation
held a variable interest at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

First-lien Mortgage VIEs

Agency

Prime

Residential Mortgage
Non-agency
Subprime

Alt-A

Commercial Mortgage

December 31
(Dollars in millions)

2021

2022

2021

2022

2021

2022

2021

2022

2021

2022

Unconsolidated VIEs
Maximum loss exposure (1)

$

9,112 $

11,600

$

91 $

121

$

735 $

908

$

28 $

14

$

1,594 $

1,445

$

232 $

175

$

3 $

8

$

25 $

44

$

26 $

12

$

91 $

21

On-balance sheet assets
Senior securities:
Trading account assets
Debt securities carried at fair
value

3,027

5,009

—

—

410

537

—

—

—

—

Held-to-maturity securities

5,853

6,416

—

—

—

—

—

—

1,268

1,157

All other assets
Total retained positions
Principal balance outstanding (2)

$

—
9,112 $

—
11,600

$

3
6 $

3
11

$

25
460 $

29
610

$

2
28 $

2
14

$

101
1,460 $

93
1,271

$

81,644 $

93,142

$

3,973 $

4,710

$

5,034 $

6,179

$

11,568 $

13,627

$

85,101 $

85,540

$

1,735 $

1,644

$

— $

49

$

78 $

—

$

— $

—

$

— $

—

$

1,735 $

1,644

$

— $

—

$

78 $

—

$

$

—

58

—

—

Consolidated VIEs
Maximum loss exposure (1)
On-balance sheet assets
Trading account assets
Loans and leases, net

(1)

(2)

—

—

— $

—

—

—

— $

—

—

—

Total assets

$

1,735 $

1,644

$

— $

58

$

78 $

—

$

— $

—

$

— $

—

Total liabilities

$

— $

—

$

— $

9

$

— $

—

$

— $

—

$

— $

—

Maximum loss exposure includes obligations under loss-sharing reinsurance and other arrangements for non-agency residential mortgage and commercial mortgage securitizations, but excludes
the reserve for representations and warranties obligations and corporate guarantees and also excludes servicing advances and other servicing rights and obligations. For more information, see
Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies and Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements.
Principal balance outstanding includes loans where the Corporation was the transferor to securitization VIEs with which it has continuing involvement, which may include servicing the loans.

Other Asset-backed Securitizations
The table below summarizes select information related to home equity, credit card and other asset-backed VIEs in which the
Corporation held a variable interest at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Home Equity Loan, Credit Card and Other Asset-backed VIEs
Home Equity (1)

Credit Card (2)

Resecuritization Trusts

Municipal Bond Trusts

December 31
(Dollars in millions)
Unconsolidated VIEs
Maximum loss exposure
On-balance sheet assets
Securities (3):
Trading account assets
Debt securities carried at fair value

Consolidated VIEs
Maximum loss exposure
On-balance sheet assets
Trading account assets
Loans and leases

$

— $

—

$

4,243 $

6,089

$

2,537 $

4,094

$

— $
1

—
1

$

— $
—

—
—

$

456 $
1,259

1,030
1,903

$

— $
—

—
—

$
$

—
1 $
326 $

—
1
430

$
$

—
— $
— $

—
—
—

$
$

2,528
4,243 $
12,255 $

3,156
6,089
18,633

$
$

—
— $
3,016 $

—
—
4,655

$

32 $

45

$

9,555 $

10,279

$

551 $

680

$

— $

210

$

— $
97

—
140

$

— $
14,555

—
14,434

$

650 $
—

686
—

$

— $
—

122
—

12
2
111 $

14
3
157

(808)
68
13,815 $

(970)
70
13,534

—
—
650 $

—
—
686

—
—
— $

—
88
210

— $
79
—
79 $

—
113
—
113

— $
4,247
13
4,260 $

—
3,248
7
3,255

— $
99
—
99 $

—
6
—
6

— $
—
—
— $

196
—
—
196

$

Total liabilities

$

(3)

2021

2022

152

Total assets
On-balance sheet liabilities
Short-term borrowings
Long-term debt
All other liabilities

(2)

2021

2022

119 $

Allowance for loan and lease losses
All other assets

(1)

2021

2022

$

Held-to-maturity securities
Total retained positions
Total assets of VIEs

2021

2022

$

$
$

$

$
$

$

$
$

$

For unconsolidated home equity loan VIEs, the maximum loss exposure includes outstanding trust certificates issued by trusts in rapid amortization, net of recorded reserves. For both
consolidated and unconsolidated home equity loan VIEs, the maximum loss exposure excludes the reserve for representations and warranties obligations and corporate guarantees. For more
information, see Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, loans and leases in the consolidated credit card trust included $3.3 billion and $4.3 billion of seller’s interest.
The retained senior securities were valued using quoted market prices or observable market inputs (Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy).

Bank of America 2022 173

Home Equity Loans
The Corporation retains interests, primarily senior securities, in
home equity securitization trusts to which it transferred home
equity loans. In addition, the Corporation may be obligated to
provide subordinate funding to the trusts during a rapid
amortization event. This obligation is included in the maximum
loss exposure in the preceding table. The charges that will
ultimately be recorded as a result of the rapid amortization
events depend on the undrawn portion of the home equity lines
of credit, performance of the loans, the amount of subsequent
draws and the timing of related cash flows.

Credit Card Securitizations
The Corporation securitizes originated and purchased credit card
loans. The Corporation’s continuing involvement with the
securitization trust includes servicing the receivables, retaining
an undivided interest (seller’s interest) in the receivables, and
holding certain retained interests, including subordinate
interests in accrued interest and fees on the securitized
receivables and cash reserve accounts.
During 2022, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation issued new
senior debt securities to third-party investors from the credit
card securitization trust totaling $2.3 billion, $1.0 billion, and
$1.0 billion, respectively.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation held
subordinate securities issued by the credit card securitization
trust with a notional principal amount of $6.7 billion and $6.5
billion. These securities serve as a form of credit enhancement
to the senior debt securities and have a stated interest rate of
zero percent. During 2022, 2021 and 2020, the credit card
securitization trust issued $363 million, $161 million and $161
million, respectively, of these subordinate securities.

The Corporation resecuritized $21.8 billion, $28.9 billion
and $39.0 billion of securities during 2022, 2021 and 2020,
respectively. Securities transferred into resecuritization VIEs
were measured at fair value with changes in fair value recorded
in market making and similar activities prior to the
resecuritization and, accordingly, no gain or loss on sale was
recorded. Securities received from the resecuritization VIEs were
recognized at their fair value of $2.4 billion, $2.2 billion and
$6.1 billion during 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2022
and 2021, substantially all of the securities were classified as
trading account assets. All of the securities received as
resecuritization proceeds during 2020 were classified as trading
account assets. Of the securities received as resecuritization
proceeds during 2020, $2.4 billion, $2.1 billion and $1.7 billion
were classified as trading account assets, debt securities
carried at fair value and HTM securities, respectively.
Substantially all of the trading account securities carried at fair
value were categorized as Level 2 within the fair value hierarchy.

Municipal Bond Trusts
The Corporation administers municipal bond trusts that hold
highly-rated, long-term, fixed-rate municipal bonds. The trusts
obtain financing by issuing floating-rate trust certificates that
reprice on a weekly or other short-term basis to third-party
investors.
The Corporation’s liquidity commitments to unconsolidated
municipal bond trusts, including those for which the Corporation
was transferor, totaled $2.5 billion and $4.1 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The weighted-average remaining
life of bonds held in the trusts at December 31, 2022 was 8.7
years. There were no significant write-downs or downgrades of
assets or issuers during 2022, 2021 and 2020.

Resecuritization Trusts

Other Variable Interest Entities

The Corporation transfers securities, typically MBS, into
resecuritization VIEs generally at the request of customers
seeking securities with specific characteristics. Generally, there
are no significant ongoing activities performed in a
resecuritization trust, and no single investor has the unilateral
ability to liquidate the trust.

The table below summarizes select information related to other
VIEs in which the Corporation held a variable interest at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Other VIEs
Consolidated
(Dollars in millions)

Maximum loss exposure
On-balance sheet assets
Trading account assets
Debt securities carried at fair value
Loans and leases
Allowance for loan and lease losses
All other assets
Total
On-balance sheet liabilities
Short-term borrowings
Long-term debt
All other liabilities
Total
Total assets of VIEs

174 Bank of America 2022

$
$

$
$

$
$

Unconsolidated
December 31, 2022
2,286 $
31,405 $

353
—
2,086
(1)
46
2,484

$

42
156
—
198
2,484

$

$

$
$

638
5
90
(12)
30,221
30,942
—
—
7,318
7,318
101,271

$

$
$

$
$

Consolidated

Total
33,691

$

991
5
2,176
(13)
30,267
33,426

$

42
156
7,318
7,516
103,755

$
$

$
$

Unconsolidated
December 31, 2021
4,819 $
27,790 $

2,552
—
2,503
(2)
28
5,081

$

51
211
—
262
5,081

$

$

$
$

626
7
47
(12)
26,628
27,296

$

—
—
6,548
6,548
92,249

$

$

$
$

Total
32,609
3,178
7
2,550
(14)
26,656
32,377
51
211
6,548
6,810
97,330

Customer VIEs
Customer VIEs include credit-linked, equity-linked and
commodity-linked note VIEs, repackaging VIEs and asset
acquisition VIEs, which are typically created on behalf of
customers who wish to obtain market or credit exposure to a
specific company, index, commodity or financial instrument.
The Corporation’s maximum loss exposure to consolidated
and unconsolidated customer VIEs totaled $914 million and
$2.9 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021, including the
notional amount of derivatives to which the Corporation is a
counterparty, net of losses previously recorded, and the
Corporation’s investment, if any, in securities issued by the
VIEs.

Collateralized Debt Obligation VIEs
The Corporation receives fees for structuring CDO VIEs, which
hold diversified pools of fixed-income securities, typically
corporate debt or ABS, which the CDO VIEs fund by issuing
multiple tranches of debt and equity securities. CDOs are
generally managed by third-party portfolio managers. The
Corporation typically transfers assets to these CDOs, holds
securities issued by the CDOs and may be a derivative
counterparty to the CDOs. The Corporation’s maximum loss
exposure to consolidated and unconsolidated CDOs totaled
$197 million and $235 million at December 31, 2022 and
2021.

Investment VIEs
The Corporation sponsors, invests in or provides financing,
which may be in connection with the sale of assets, to a variety
of investment VIEs that hold loans, real estate, debt securities
or other financial instruments and are designed to provide the
desired investment profile to investors or the Corporation. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation’s consolidated
investment VIEs had total assets of $854 million and $1.0
billion. The Corporation also held investments in unconsolidated
VIEs with total assets of $12.2 billion and $7.1 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The Corporation’s maximum
loss exposure associated with both consolidated and
unconsolidated investment VIEs totaled $2.4 billion and $2.0
billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021 comprised primarily of
on-balance sheet assets less non-recourse liabilities.

Leveraged Lease Trusts
The Corporation’s net investment in consolidated leveraged
lease trusts totaled $1.2 billion and $1.5 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The trusts hold long-lived
equipment such as rail cars, power generation and distribution
equipment, and commercial aircraft. The Corporation structures
the trusts and holds a significant residual interest. The net
investment represents the Corporation’s maximum loss
exposure to the trusts in the unlikely event that the leveraged
lease investments become worthless. Debt issued by the
leveraged lease trusts is non-recourse to the Corporation.

Tax Credit VIEs
The Corporation holds investments in unconsolidated limited
partnerships and similar entities that construct, own and
operate affordable housing, wind and solar projects. An
unrelated third party is typically the general partner or managing
member and has control over the significant activities of the VIE.
As an investor, tax credits associated with the investments in
these entities are allocated to the Corporation, as provided by
the U.S. Internal Revenue Code and related regulations, and are
recognized as income tax benefits in the Corporation’s
Consolidated Statement of Income in the year they are earned,

which varies based on the type of investments. Tax credits from
environmental, social and governance (ESG) investments in
affordable housing are recognized ratably over a term of up to
10 years, and tax credits from wind and solar energy
investments are recognized either at inception for transactions
electing Investment Tax Credits (ITCs) or as energy is produced
for transactions electing Production Tax Credits (PTCs), which is
generally up to a 10-year time period. The volume and types of
investments held by the Corporation will influence the amount of
tax credits recognized each period. The maximum loss exposure
included in the Other VIEs table was $28.8 billion and $25.7
billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. In addition to that
amount, the Corporation had unfunded capital contributions for
renewable energy investments of $1.9 billion and $1.0 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The capital contributions are
contingent on various conditions precedent to funding over the
next two years. The Corporation’s risk of loss is generally
mitigated by policies requiring that the project qualify for the
expected tax credits prior to making its investment.
The Corporation’s investments in affordable housing
partnerships, which are reported in other assets on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet, totaled $14.1 billion and $12.6
billion, including unfunded commitments to provide capital
contributions of $6.6 billion and $5.8 billion, at December 31,
2022 and 2021. The unfunded commitments are expected to
be paid over the next five years. During 2022, 2021 and 2020,
the Corporation recognized tax credits and other tax benefits of
$1.5 billion, $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion and reported pretax
losses in other income of $1.2 billion, $1.1 billion and $1.0
billion. These tax credits are recognized as part of the
Corporation’s annual effective tax rate used to determine tax
expense in a given quarter. The Corporation may be asked to
invest additional amounts to support a troubled affordable
housing project. Such additional investments have not been and
are not expected to be significant.

NOTE 7 Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill
The table below presents goodwill balances by business
segment at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The reporting units
utilized for goodwill impairment testing are the operating
segments or one level below.

Goodwill
(Dollars in millions)

Consumer Banking
Global Wealth & Investment Management
Global Banking
Global Markets
Total goodwill

$

$

December 31
2021
2022
30,137
30,137 $
9,677
9,677
24,026
24,026
5,182
5,182
69,022
69,022 $

During 2022, the Corporation completed its annual goodwill
impairment test as of June 30, 2022 using qualitative
assessments for all applicable reporting units. Based on the
results of the annual goodwill impairment test, the Corporation
determined there was no impairment. For more information on
the use of qualitative assessments, see Note 1 – Summary of
Significant Accounting Principles.

Intangible Assets
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the net carrying value of
intangible assets was $2.1 billion and $2.2 billion. At both
December 31, 2022 and 2021, intangible assets included $1.6

Bank of America 2022 175

billion of intangible assets associated with trade names,
substantially all of which had an indefinite life and, accordingly,
are not being amortized. Amortization of intangibles expense
was $78 million, $76 million and $95 million for 2022, 2021
and 2020.

NOTE 8 Leases
The Corporation enters into both lessor and lessee
arrangements. For more information on lease accounting, see
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles and on
lease financing receivables, see Note 5 – Outstanding Loans and
Leases and Allowance for Credit Losses.

Lessor Arrangements
The Corporation’s lessor arrangements primarily consist of
operating, sales-type and direct financing leases for equipment.
Lease agreements may include options to renew and for the
lessee to purchase the leased equipment at the end of the
lease term.
The table below presents the net investment in sales-type
and direct financing leases at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Net Investment (1)

Supplemental Information for Lessee Arrangements
(Dollars in millions)

Right-of-use asset
$
Lease liabilities
Weighted-average discount rate
used to calculate present value
of future minimum lease
payments
Weighted-average lease term (in
years)
Right-of-use assets obtained in
exchange for new operating
lease liabilities (1)

Lease Cost and Supplemental
Information:
Operating lease cost
Variable lease cost (3)
Total lease cost (4)
(2)

(Dollars in millions)

Lease receivables
Unguaranteed residuals
Total net investment in sales-type and direct
financing leases
(1)

$

$

17,266

$

18,884

In certain cases, the Corporation obtains third-party residual value insurance to reduce its
residual asset risk. The carrying value of residual assets with third-party residual value
insurance for at least a portion of the asset value was $6.5 billion and $7.1 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.

The table below presents lease income for 2022, 2021 and
2020.

Lease Income
(Dollars in millions)

Sales-type and direct financing leases
Operating leases
Total lease income

2021
$
613
930
$ 1,543

2020
$
707
931
$ 1,638

Lessee Arrangements
The Corporation's lessee arrangements predominantly consist
of operating leases for premises and equipment; the
Corporation's financing leases are not significant.
Lease terms may contain renewal and extension options and
early termination features. Generally, these options do not
impact the lease term because the Corporation is not
reasonably certain that it will exercise the options.
The following table provides information on the right-of-use
assets, lease liabilities and weighted-average discount rates
and lease terms at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

176 Bank of America 2022

2.91 %

8.6

9.0

824

$

(3)
(4)

1,713
2021

2020

$

1,986

$

1,964

$

2,039

$

2,008
464
2,472

$

2,025
462
2,487

$

2,149
474
2,623

$

$

$

Represents non-cash activity and, accordingly, is not reflected in the Consolidated Statement
of Cash Flows.
Represents cash paid for amounts included in the measurements of lease liabilities.
Primarily consists of payments for common area maintenance and property taxes.
Amounts are recorded in occupancy and equipment expense in the Consolidated Statement
of Income.

Maturity Analysis
The maturities of lessor and lessee arrangements outstanding
at December 31, 2022 are presented in the table below based
on undiscounted cash flows.

Maturities of Lessor and Lessee Arrangements

(Dollars in millions)

2022
$
589
941
$ 1,530

$

3.25 %

2022
Operating cash flows from
operating leases (2)

(1)

December 31
2021
2022
16,806
15,123 $
2,078
2,143

December 31
2021
2022
$ 10,233
9,755
10,858
10,359

2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Thereafter
Total undiscounted
cash flows
Less: Net present
value adjustment
Total (3)
(1)

(2)

(3)

$

$

Lessor
Sales-type and
Operating
Direct Financing
Leases
Leases (2)
December 31, 2022
819 $
4,932 $
682
4,399
509
2,539
368
1,993
289
990
664
1,635
3,331

16,488

$

1,365
15,123

Lessee (1)
Operating
Leases
1,998
1,850
1,567
1,354
1,131
4,189
12,089

$

1,730
10,359

Excludes $278 million in commitments under lessee arrangements that have not yet
commenced with lease terms that will begin in 2023.
Includes $10.2 billion in commercial lease financing receivables and $4.9 billion in direct/
indirect consumer lease financing receivables.
Represents lease receivables for lessor arrangements and lease liabilities for lessee
arrangements.

NOTE 9 Deposits
The scheduled contractual maturities for total time deposits at December 31, 2022 are presented in the table below.

Contractual Maturities of Total Time Deposits
(Dollars in millions)

Due in 2023
Due in 2024
Due in 2025
Due in 2026
Due in 2027
Thereafter
Total time deposits

$

$

At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
aggregate U.S. time deposits of $12.8 billion and $9.4 billion
and non-U.S. time deposits of $9.0 billion and $10.6 billion in
denominations that met or exceeded insurance limits.

NOTE 10 Securities Financing Agreements,
Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and Restricted
Cash
The Corporation enters into securities financing agreements
which include securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell and securities loaned or sold under
agreements to repurchase. These financing agreements (also
referred to as “matched-book transactions”) are to
accommodate customers, obtain securities to cover short
positions and finance inventory positions. The Corporation
elects to account for certain securities financing agreements
under the fair value option. For more information on the fair
value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option.

Offsetting of Securities Financing Agreements
Substantially all of the Corporation’s securities financing
activities are transacted under legally enforceable master

U.S.
36,114
3,576
643
149
116
238
40,836

Non-U.S.
7,393
67
6
23
1,472
8
$
8,969

$

$

$

Total
43,507
3,643
649
172
1,588
246
49,805

repurchase agreements or legally enforceable master securities
lending agreements that give the Corporation, in the event of
default by the counterparty, the right to liquidate securities held
and to offset receivables and payables with the same
counterparty. The Corporation offsets securities financing
transactions with the same counterparty on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet where it has such a legally enforceable master
netting agreement and the transactions have the same maturity
date.
The Securities Financing Agreements table presents
securities financing agreements included on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet in federal funds sold and securities borrowed or
purchased under agreements to resell, and in federal funds
purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to
repurchase at December 31, 2022 and 2021. Balances are
presented on a gross basis, prior to the application of
counterparty netting. Gross assets and liabilities are adjusted
on an aggregate basis to take into consideration the effects of
legally enforceable master netting agreements. For more
information on the offsetting of derivatives, see Note 3 –
Derivatives.

Securities Financing Agreements
Gross Assets/
Liabilities (1)
(Dollars in millions)

Securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell (3)
Securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase
Other (4)
Total

Securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell (3)
Securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase
Other (4)
Total
(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

$
$
$

$
$
$

597,847
525,908
8,427
534,335

527,054
468,663
11,391
480,054

Net Balance
Sheet Amount
December 31, 2022
(330,273) $
267,574
(330,273) $
195,635
—
8,427
(330,273) $
204,062

Amounts Offset
$
$
$

$
$
$

(276,334)
(276,334)
—
(276,334)

Financial
Instruments (2)
$
$
$

(240,120)
(183,265)
(8,427)
(191,692)

December 31, 2021
$
250,720 $
$
192,329 $
11,391
$
203,720 $

(229,525)
(181,860)
(11,391)
(193,251)

Net Assets/
Liabilities
$
$
$

$
$
$

27,454
12,370
—
12,370

21,195
10,469
—
10,469

Includes activity where uncertainty exists as to the enforceability of certain master netting agreements under bankruptcy laws in some countries or industries.
Includes securities collateral received or pledged under repurchase or securities lending agreements where there is a legally enforceable master netting agreement. These amounts are not offset
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, but are shown as a reduction to derive a net asset or liability. Securities collateral received or pledged where the legal enforceability of the master netting
agreements is uncertain is excluded from the table.
Excludes repurchase activity of $8.7 billion and $20.1 billion reported in loans and leases on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Balance is reported in accrued expenses and other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and relates to transactions where the Corporation acts as the lender in a securities lending
agreement and receives securities that can be pledged as collateral or sold. In these transactions, the Corporation recognizes an asset at fair value, representing the securities received, and a
liability, representing the obligation to return those securities.

Repurchase Agreements and Securities Loaned
Transactions Accounted for as Secured Borrowings
The following tables present securities sold under agreements
to repurchase and securities loaned by remaining contractual
term to maturity and class of collateral pledged. Included in
“Other” are transactions where the Corporation acts as the

lender in a securities lending agreement and receives securities
that can be pledged as collateral or sold. Certain agreements
contain a right to substitute collateral and/or terminate the
agreement prior to maturity at the option of the Corporation or
the counterparty. Such agreements are included in the table
below based on the remaining contractual term to maturity.

Bank of America 2022 177

Remaining Contractual Maturity
Overnight and
Continuous

181,632
288
—
181,920

After 30 Days
Through 90 Days
December 31, 2022
$
41,666
1,139
—
$
42,805

194,964
466
—
195,430

December 31, 2021
$
36,939
1,428
—
$
38,367

30 Days or Less

(Dollars in millions)

Securities sold under agreements to repurchase
Securities loaned
Other
Total

$

Securities sold under agreements to repurchase
Securities loaned
Other
Total

$

(1)

$

$

200,087
66,909
8,427
275,423

$

148,023
46,231
11,391
205,645

$

$

$

Greater than
90 Days (1)
$

$

$

$

Total

30,107
4,080
—
34,187

$

36,501
4,111
—
40,612

$

$

$

453,492
72,416
8,427
534,335

416,427
52,236
11,391
480,054

No agreements have maturities greater than four years.

Class of Collateral Pledged
Securities Sold
Under Agreements
to Repurchase
(Dollars in millions)

U.S. government and agency securities
Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Mortgage trading loans and ABS
Total

U.S. government and agency securities
Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Mortgage trading loans and ABS
Total

$

$

$

$

Under repurchase agreements, the Corporation is required to
post collateral with a market value equal to or in excess of the
principal amount borrowed. For securities loaned transactions,
the Corporation receives collateral in the form of cash, letters of
credit or other securities. To determine whether the market
value of the underlying collateral remains sufficient, collateral is
generally valued daily, and the Corporation may be required to
deposit additional collateral or may receive or return collateral
pledged when appropriate. Repurchase agreements and
securities loaned transactions are generally either overnight,
continuous (i.e., no stated term) or short-term. The Corporation
manages liquidity risks related to these agreements by sourcing
funding from a diverse group of counterparties, providing a
range of securities collateral and pursuing longer durations,
when appropriate.

Short-term Bank Notes
Bank of America, N.A. maintains a global program to offer up to
a maximum of $75.0 billion outstanding at any one time, of
bank notes with fixed or floating rates and maturities of at least
seven days from the date of issue. Short-term bank notes
outstanding under this program totaled $6.2 billion and $1.8
billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021. These short-term bank
notes, along with Federal Home Loan Bank advances, U.S.

178 Bank of America 2022

193,005
14,345
10,249
232,171
3,722
453,492

201,546
12,838
19,907
178,019
4,117
416,427

$

$

$

$

Securities
Loaned
Other
December 31, 2022
18 $
—
2,896
317
69,432
8,110
70
—
—
—
72,416 $
8,427
December 31, 2021
27 $
3,440
48,650
119
—
52,236 $

—
1,148
10,192
51
—
11,391

Total
$

$

$

$

193,023
17,558
87,791
232,241
3,722
534,335

201,573
17,426
78,749
178,189
4,117
480,054

Treasury tax and loan notes, and term federal funds purchased,
are included in short-term borrowings on the Consolidated
Balance Sheet.

Collateral
The Corporation accepts securities and loans as collateral that
it is permitted by contract or practice to sell or repledge. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the fair value of this collateral
was $827.6 billion and $854.8 billion, of which $764.1 billion
and $782.7 billion were sold or repledged. The primary source
of this collateral is securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell.
The Corporation also pledges company-owned securities and
loans as collateral in transactions that include repurchase
agreements, securities loaned, public and trust deposits, U.S.
Treasury tax and loan notes, and short-term borrowings. This
collateral, which in some cases can be sold or repledged by the
counterparties to the transactions, is parenthetically disclosed
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
In certain cases, the Corporation has transferred assets to
consolidated VIEs where those restricted assets serve as
collateral for the interests issued by the VIEs. These assets are
included on the Consolidated Balance Sheet in Assets of
Consolidated VIEs.

In addition, the Corporation obtains collateral in connection
with its derivative contracts. Required collateral levels vary
depending on the credit risk rating and the type of counterparty.
Generally, the Corporation accepts collateral in the form of
cash, U.S. Treasury securities and other marketable securities.
Based on provisions contained in master netting agreements,
the Corporation nets cash collateral received against derivative
assets. The Corporation also pledges collateral on its own
derivative positions which can be applied against derivative

liabilities. For more information on the collateral of derivatives,
see Note 3 – Derivatives.

Restricted Cash
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation held
restricted cash included within cash and cash equivalents on
the Consolidated Balance Sheet of $7.6 billion and $5.9 billion,
predominantly related to cash segregated in compliance with
securities regulations and cash held on deposit with central
banks to meet reserve requirements.

NOTE 11 Long-term Debt
Long-term debt consists of borrowings having an original maturity of one year or more. The table below presents the balance of longterm debt at December 31, 2022 and 2021, and the related contractual rates and maturity dates as of December 31, 2022.

(Dollars in millions)

Weightedaverage Rate

Notes issued by Bank of America Corporation (1)
Senior notes:
Fixed
Floating
Senior structured notes
Subordinated notes:
Fixed
Floating
Junior subordinated notes:
Fixed
Floating
Total notes issued by Bank of America Corporation
Notes issued by Bank of America, N.A.
Senior notes:
Fixed
Floating
Subordinated notes
Advances from Federal Home Loan Banks:
Fixed
Securitizations and other BANA VIEs (2)
Other
Total notes issued by Bank of America, N.A.
Other debt
Structured liabilities (3)
Nonbank VIEs (2)
Other
Total notes issued by nonbank and other entities
Total long-term debt
(1)
(2)

(3)

December 31
Interest Rates

Maturity Dates

2021

2022

$

194,191
18,753
15,086

0.25 - 8.05 %
0.74 - 9.16

2023 - 2052
2023 - 2044

4.88
3.45

2.94 - 8.57
2.48 - 5.53

2024 - 2045
2026 - 2037

21,098
4,544

22,311
2,371

6.71
5.56

6.45 - 8.05
5.56

2027 - 2066
2056

743
1
243,892

741
1
253,454

5.05
6.00

5.05
6.00

2024
2036

—
2,600
1,485

501
3,173
1,780

4.49

0.01 - 7.42

2023 - 2034

681
4,300
908
9,974

290
3,338
680
9,762

21,835
281
—
22,116
275,982

16,599
249
53
16,901
280,117

$

188,429
17,469
11,608

$

3.03 %
4.2

$

Includes total loss-absorbing capacity compliant debt.
Represents liabilities of consolidated VIEs included in total long-term debt on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Long-term debt of VIEs is collateralized by the assets of the VIEs. At December 31,
2022, amount includes debt predominantly from credit card securitization and other VIEs of $4.2 billion and $156 million. For more information, see Note 6 – Securitizations and Other Variable
Interest Entities.
Includes debt outstanding of $8.0 billion and $5.4 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021 that was issued by BofA Finance LLC, a consolidated finance subsidiary of Bank of America
Corporation, the parent company, and is fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the parent company.

During 2022, the Corporation issued $66.0 billion of longterm debt consisting of $44.2 billion of notes issued by Bank of
America Corporation, $10.0 billion of notes issued by Bank of
America, N.A. and $11.8 billion of other debt. During 2021, the
Corporation issued $76.7 billion of long-term debt consisting of
$56.2 billion of notes issued by Bank of America Corporation,
$8.0 billion of notes issued by Bank of America, N.A. and $12.5
billion of other debt.
During 2022, the Corporation had total long-term debt
maturities and redemptions in the aggregate of $33.3 billion
consisting of $19.8 billion for Bank of America Corporation,
$9.9 billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $3.6 billion of other
debt. During 2021, the Corporation had total long-term debt
maturities and redemptions in the aggregate of $46.4 billion
consisting of $24.4 billion for Bank of America Corporation,
$10.4 billion for Bank of America, N.A. and $11.6 billion of
other debt.

Bank of America Corporation and Bank of America, N.A.
maintain various U.S. and non-U.S. debt programs to offer both
senior and subordinated notes. The notes may be denominated
in U.S. dollars or foreign currencies. At December 31, 2022 and
2021, the amount of foreign currency-denominated debt
translated into U.S. dollars included in total long-term debt was
$46.7 billion and $53.1 billion. Foreign currency contracts may
be used to convert certain foreign currency-denominated debt
into U.S. dollars.
The weighted-average effective interest rates for total longterm debt (excluding senior structured notes), total fixed-rate
debt and total floating-rate debt were 3.27 percent, 3.23
percent and 4.14 percent, respectively, at December 31, 2022,
and 2.83 percent, 3.08 percent and 0.75 percent, respectively,
at December 31, 2021. The Corporation’s ALM activities
maintain an overall interest rate risk management strategy that
incorporates the use of interest rate contracts to manage
fluctuations in earnings caused by interest rate volatility. The

Bank of America 2022 179

Corporation’s goal is to manage interest rate sensitivity so that
movements in interest rates do not have a significantly adverse
effect on earnings and capital. The weighted-average rates are
the contractual interest rates on the debt and do not reflect the
impacts of derivative transactions.
The table below shows the carrying value for aggregate
annual contractual maturities of long-term debt as of
December 31, 2022. Included in the table are certain structured
notes issued by the Corporation that contain provisions whereby
the borrowings are redeemable at the option of the holder (put

options) at specified dates prior to maturity. Other structured
notes have coupon or repayment terms linked to the
performance of debt or equity securities, indices, currencies or
commodities, and the maturity may be accelerated based on the
value of a referenced index or security. In both cases, the
Corporation or a subsidiary may be required to settle the
obligation for cash or other securities prior to the contractual
maturity date. These borrowings are reflected in the table as
maturing at their contractual maturity date.

Long-term Debt by Maturity
2023

(Dollars in millions)

Bank of America Corporation
Senior notes
Senior structured notes
Subordinated notes
Junior subordinated notes
Total Bank of America Corporation
Bank of America, N.A.
Senior notes
Subordinated notes
Advances from Federal Home Loan Banks
Securitizations and other Bank VIEs (1)
Other
Total Bank of America, N.A.
Other debt
Structured Liabilities
Nonbank VIEs (1)
Other
Total other debt
Total long-term debt
(1)

$

$

8,029
767
—
—
8,796

2024
$

22,570
456
3,205
—
26,231

2025
$

24,730
558
5,132
—
30,420

2026
$

2027

23,972
946
4,908
—
29,826

$

Thereafter

16,055
641
2,155
188
19,039

$

110,542
8,240
10,242
556
129,580

Total
$

205,898
11,608
25,642
744
243,892

—
—
600
1,000
642
2,242

2,600
—
—
1,000
89
3,689

—
—
15
2,248
71
2,334

—
—
9
—
45
54

—
—
4
—
63
67

—
1,485
53
52
(2)
1,588

2,600
1,485
681
4,300
908
9,974

5,253
—
—
5,253
16,291

2,426
—
—
2,426
32,346

2,482
—
—
2,482
35,236

1,474
—
—
1,474
31,354

2,001
—
—
2,001
21,107

8,199
281
—
8,480
139,648

21,835
281
—
22,116
275,982

$

$

$

$

$

$

Represents liabilities of consolidated VIEs included in total long-term debt on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.

NOTE 12 Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, the Corporation enters into a
number of off-balance sheet commitments. These commitments
expose the Corporation to varying degrees of credit and market
risk and are subject to the same credit and market risk
limitation reviews as those instruments recorded on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet.

Credit Extension Commitments
The Corporation enters into commitments to extend credit such
as loan commitments, SBLCs and commercial letters of credit
to meet the financing needs of its customers. The following
table includes the notional amount of unfunded legally binding
lending commitments net of amounts distributed (i.e.,
syndicated or participated) to other financial institutions. The
distributed amounts were $10.4 billion and $10.7 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The carrying value of the
Corporation’s credit extension commitments at December 31,
2022 and 2021, excluding commitments accounted for under

180 Bank of America 2022

the fair value option, was $1.6 billion and $1.5 billion, which
predominantly related to the reserve for unfunded lending
commitments. The carrying value of these commitments is
classified in accrued expenses and other liabilities on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Legally binding commitments to extend credit generally have
specified rates and maturities. Certain of these commitments
have adverse change clauses that help to protect the
Corporation against deterioration in the borrower’s ability to pay.
The following table includes the notional amount of
commitments of $3.0 billion and $4.8 billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021 that are accounted for under the fair value
option. However, the table excludes the cumulative net fair
value for these commitments of $110 million and $97 million at
December 31, 2022 and 2021, which is classified in accrued
expenses and other liabilities. For more information regarding
the Corporation’s loan commitments accounted for under the
fair value option, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option.

Credit Extension Commitments
Expire After One
Year Through
Three Years

Expire in One
Year or Less
(Dollars in millions)

Notional amount of credit extension commitments
Loan commitments (1)
Home equity lines of credit
Standby letters of credit and financial guarantees (2)
Letters of credit
Other commitments (3)
Legally binding commitments
Credit card lines (4)
Total credit extension commitments

$

$

113,962
1,479
22,565
853
5
138,864
419,144
558,008

$

$

162,890
7,230
9,237
46
93
179,496
—
179,496

Expire After Three
Years Through
Five Years
December 31, 2022
$

$

221,374
11,578
2,787
52
71
235,862
—
235,862

Expire After
Five Years

$

$

13,667
22,154
628
49
1,103
37,601
—
37,601

Total

$

$

511,893
42,441
35,217
1,000
1,272
591,823
419,144
1,010,967

December 31, 2021
Notional amount of credit extension commitments
Loan commitments (1)
Home equity lines of credit
Standby letters of credit and financial guarantees (2)
Letters of credit
Other commitments (3)
Legally binding commitments
Credit card lines (4)
Total credit extension commitments
(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

$

$

102,464
890
22,359
1,145
18
126,876
406,169
533,045

$

$

190,687
5,097
10,742
124
59
206,709
—
206,709

$

$

174,978
10,268
2,017
56
81
187,400
—
187,400

$

$

26,635
24,276
422
98
1,233
52,664
—
52,664

$

$

494,764
40,531
35,540
1,423
1,391
573,649
406,169
979,818

At December 31, 2022 and 2021, $2.6 billion and $4.6 billion of these loan commitments were held in the form of a security.
The notional amounts of SBLCs and financial guarantees classified as investment grade and non-investment grade based on the credit quality of the underlying reference name within the
instrument were $25.1 billion and $9.5 billion at December 31, 2022, and $26.3 billion and $8.7 billion at December 31, 2021. Amounts in the table include consumer SBLCs of $575 million
and $512 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Primarily includes second-loss positions on lease-end residual value guarantees.
Includes business card unused lines of credit.

Other Commitments
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
commitments to purchase loans (e.g., residential mortgage and
commercial real estate) of $636 million and $181 million, which
upon settlement will be included in trading account assets,
loans or LHFS, and commitments to purchase commercial loans
of $294 million and $518 million, which upon settlement will be
included in trading account assets.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
commitments to purchase commodities, primarily liquefied
natural gas, of $0 and $949 million, which upon settlement will
be included in trading account assets.
At both December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
commitments to enter into resale and forward-dated resale and
securities borrowing agreements of $92.0 billion, and
commitments to enter into forward-dated repurchase and
securities lending agreements of $57.8 billion and $32.6 billion
as of both period ends. These commitments generally expire
within the next 12 months.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had a
commitment to originate or purchase up to $3.7 billion and
$4.0 billion on a rolling 12-month basis, of auto loans and
leases from a strategic partner. This commitment extends
through November 2026 and can be terminated with 12 months
prior notice.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had
unfunded equity investment commitments of $571 million and
$395 million.

Other Guarantees
Bank-owned Life Insurance Book Value Protection
The Corporation sells products that offer book value protection
to insurance carriers who offer group life insurance policies to
corporations, primarily banks. At December 31, 2022 and
2021, the notional amount of these guarantees totaled $4.3

billion and $6.3 billion. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
Corporation’s maximum exposure related to these guarantees
totaled $632 million and $928 million, with estimated maturity
dates between 2033 and 2039.

Indemnifications
In the ordinary course of business, the Corporation enters into
various agreements that contain indemnifications, such as tax
indemnifications, whereupon payment may become due if
certain external events occur, such as a change in tax law. The
indemnification clauses are often standard contractual terms
and were entered into in the normal course of business based
on an assessment that the risk of loss would be remote. These
agreements typically contain an early termination clause that
permits the Corporation to exit the agreement upon these
events. The maximum potential future payment under
indemnification agreements is difficult to assess for several
reasons, including the occurrence of an external event, the
inability to predict future changes in tax and other laws, the
difficulty in determining how such laws would apply to parties in
contracts, the absence of exposure limits contained in standard
contract language and the timing of any early termination
clauses. Historically, any payments made under these
guarantees have been de minimis. The Corporation has
assessed the probability of making such payments in the future
as remote.

Merchant Services
The Corporation in its role as merchant acquirer or as a sponsor
of other merchant acquirers may be held liable for any reversed
charges that cannot be collected from the merchants, due to,
among other things, merchant fraud or insolvency. If charges are
properly reversed after a purchase and cannot be collected from
either the merchants or merchant acquirers, the Corporation
may be held liable for these reversed charges. The ability to
reverse a charge is primarily governed by the applicable

Bank of America 2022 181

payment network rules and regulations, which include, but are
not limited to, the type of charge, type of payment used and
time limits. The total amount of transactions subject to reversal
under payment network rules and regulations processed for the
preceding six-month period, which was approximately $501
billion, is an estimate of the Corporation’s maximum potential
exposure as of December 31, 2022. The Corporation’s risk in
this area primarily relates to circumstances where a cardholder
has purchased goods or services for future delivery. The
Corporation mitigates this risk by requiring cash deposits,
guarantees, letters of credit or other types of collateral from
certain merchants. The Corporation’s reserves for contingent
losses and the losses incurred related to the merchant
processing activity were not significant.

Exchange and Clearing House Member Guarantees
The Corporation is a member of various securities and derivative
exchanges and clearinghouses, both in the U.S. and other
countries. As a member, the Corporation may be required to pay
a pro-rata share of the losses incurred by some of these
organizations as a result of another member default and under
other loss scenarios. The Corporation’s potential obligations
may be limited to its membership interests in such exchanges
and clearinghouses, to the amount (or multiple) of the
Corporation’s contribution to the guarantee fund or, in limited
instances, to the full pro-rata share of the residual losses after
applying the guarantee fund. The Corporation’s maximum
potential exposure under these membership agreements is
difficult to estimate; however, the Corporation has assessed the
probability of making any such payments as remote.

Prime Brokerage and Securities Clearing Services
In connection with its prime brokerage and clearing businesses,
the Corporation performs securities clearance and settlement
services with other brokerage firms and clearinghouses on
behalf of its clients. Under these arrangements, the Corporation
stands ready to meet the obligations of its clients with respect
to securities transactions. The Corporation’s obligations in this
respect are secured by the assets in the clients’ accounts and
the accounts of their customers as well as by any proceeds
received from the transactions cleared and settled by the
Corporation on behalf of clients or their customers. The
Corporation’s maximum potential exposure under these
arrangements is difficult to estimate; however, the potential for
the Corporation to incur material losses pursuant to these
arrangements is remote.

Fixed Income Clearing Corporation Sponsored Member
Repo Program
The Corporation acts as a sponsoring member in a repo
program whereby the Corporation clears certain eligible resale
and repurchase agreements through the Government Securities
Division of the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation on behalf of
clients that are sponsored members in accordance with the
Fixed Income Clearing Corporation’s rules. As part of this
program, the Corporation guarantees the payment and
performance of its sponsored members to the Fixed Income
Clearing Corporation. The Corporation’s guarantee obligation is
secured by a security interest in cash or high-quality securities
collateral placed by clients with the clearinghouse and therefore,
the potential for the Corporation to incur significant losses
under this arrangement is remote. The Corporation’s maximum
potential exposure, without taking into consideration the related
collateral, was $59.6 billion and $42.0 billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021.

182 Bank of America 2022

Other Guarantees
In the normal course of business, the Corporation periodically
guarantees the obligations of its affiliates in a variety of
transactions including ISDA-related transactions and non-ISDA
related transactions such as commodities trading, repurchase
agreements, prime brokerage agreements and other
transactions.

Guarantees of Certain Long-term Debt
The Corporation, as the parent company, fully and
unconditionally guarantees the securities issued by BofA
Finance LLC, a consolidated finance subsidiary of the
Corporation, and effectively provides for the full and
unconditional guarantee of trust securities issued by certain
statutory trust companies that are 100 percent owned finance
subsidiaries of the Corporation.

Representations and Warranties Obligations and Corporate
Guarantees
The Corporation securitizes first-lien residential mortgage loans
generally in the form of RMBS guaranteed by the GSEs or by
GNMA in the case of FHA-insured, VA-guaranteed and Rural
Housing Service-guaranteed mortgage loans, and sells pools of
first-lien residential mortgage loans in the form of whole loans.
In addition, in prior years, legacy companies and certain
subsidiaries sold pools of first-lien residential mortgage loans
and home equity loans as private-label securitizations or in the
form of whole loans. In connection with these transactions, the
Corporation or certain of its subsidiaries or legacy companies
make and have made various representations and warranties.
Breaches of these representations and warranties have resulted
in and may continue to result in the requirement to repurchase
mortgage loans or to otherwise make whole or provide
indemnification or other remedies to sponsors, investors,
securitization trusts, guarantors, insurers or other parties
(collectively, repurchases).

Unresolved Repurchase Claims
Unresolved representations and warranties repurchase claims
represent the notional amount of repurchase claims made by
counterparties, typically the outstanding principal balance or the
unpaid principal balance at the time of default. In the case of
first-lien mortgages, the claim amount is often significantly
greater than the expected loss amount due to the benefit of
collateral and, in some cases, mortgage insurance or mortgage
guarantee payments.
The notional amount of unresolved repurchase claims at
December 31, 2022 and 2021 was $5.5 billion and $8.4
billion. These balances included $2.2 billion and $2.8 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021 of claims related to loans in
specific private-label securitization groups or tranches where the
Corporation owns substantially all of the outstanding securities
or will otherwise realize the benefit of any repurchase claims
paid.
During 2022, the Corporation received $82 million in new
repurchase claims that were not time-barred. During 2022, $3.0
billion in claims were resolved.

Reserve and Related Provision
The reserve for representations and warranties obligations and
corporate guarantees was $612 million and $1.2 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021 and is included in accrued
expenses and other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance
Sheet, and the related provision is included in other income in
the Consolidated Statement of Income. The representations and
warranties reserve represents the Corporation’s best estimate

of probable incurred losses, is based on its experience in
previous negotiations, and is subject to judgment, a variety of
assumptions, and known or unknown uncertainties. Future
representations and warranties losses may occur in excess of
the amounts recorded for these exposures; however, the
Corporation does not expect such amounts to be material to the
Corporation's financial condition and liquidity. See Litigation and
Regulatory Matters below for the Corporation's combined range
of possible loss in excess of the reserve for representations
and warranties and the accrued liability for litigation.

Litigation and Regulatory Matters
In the ordinary course of business, the Corporation and its
subsidiaries are routinely defendants in or parties to many
pending and threatened legal, regulatory and governmental
actions and proceedings. In view of the inherent difficulty of
predicting the outcome of such matters, particularly where the
claimants seek very large or indeterminate damages or where
the matters present novel legal theories or involve a large
number of parties, the Corporation generally cannot predict the
eventual outcome of the pending matters, timing of the ultimate
resolution of these matters, or eventual loss, fines or penalties
related to each pending matter.
As a matter develops, the Corporation, in conjunction with
any outside counsel handling the matter, evaluates whether
such matter presents a loss contingency that is probable and
estimable, and, for the matters below, whether a loss in excess
of any accrued liability is reasonably possible in future periods.
Once the loss contingency is deemed to be both probable and
estimable, the Corporation will establish an accrued liability and
record a corresponding amount of expense. The Corporation
continues to monitor the matter for further developments that
could affect the amount of the accrued liability that has been
previously established. Excluding expenses of internal and
external legal service providers, litigation and regulatory
investigation-related expense of $1.2 billion and $164 million
was recognized in 2022 and 2021.
For any matter disclosed in this Note for which a loss in
future periods is reasonably possible and estimable (whether in
excess of an accrued liability or where there is no accrued
liability) and for representations and warranties exposures, the
Corporation’s estimated range of possible loss is $0 to $0.8
billion in excess of the accrued liability, if any, as of
December 31, 2022.
The accrued liability and estimated range of possible loss
are based upon currently available information and subject to
significant judgment, a variety of assumptions and known and
unknown uncertainties. The matters underlying the accrued
liability and estimated range of possible loss are unpredictable
and may change from time to time, and actual losses may vary
significantly from the current estimate and accrual. The
estimated range of possible loss does not represent the
Corporation’s maximum loss exposure.
Information is provided below regarding the nature of the
litigation and, where specified, associated claimed damages.
Based on current knowledge, and taking into account accrued
liabilities, management does not believe that loss contingencies
arising from pending matters, including the matters described
below, will have a material adverse effect on the consolidated
financial condition or liquidity of the Corporation. However, in
light of the significant judgment, variety of assumptions and
uncertainties involved in those matters, some of which are
beyond the Corporation’s control, and the very large or
indeterminate damages sought in some of those matters, an
adverse outcome in one or more of those matters could be

material to the Corporation’s business or results of operations
for any particular reporting period, or cause significant
reputational harm.

Deposit Insurance Assessment
On January 9, 2017, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC) filed suit against BANA in the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia (“District Court”) alleging failure to pay a
December 15, 2016 invoice for additional deposit insurance
assessments and interest in the amount of $542 million for the
quarters ending June 30, 2013 through December 31, 2014.
On April 7, 2017, the FDIC amended its complaint to add a
claim for additional deposit insurance and interest in the
amount of $583 million for the quarters ending March 31, 2012
through March 31, 2013. The FDIC asserts these claims based
on BANA’s alleged underreporting of counterparty exposures
that resulted in underpayment of assessments for those
quarters, and its Enforcement Section is also conducting a
parallel investigation related to the same alleged reporting error.
BANA disagrees with the FDIC’s interpretation of the regulations
as they existed during the relevant time period and is defending
itself against the FDIC’s claims. Pending final resolution, BANA
has pledged security satisfactory to the FDIC related to the
disputed additional assessment amounts. On March 27, 2018,
the District Court denied BANA’s partial motion to dismiss
certain of the FDIC’s claims. On January 24, 2023, the
magistrate judge assigned to the matter by the District Court
judge held oral argument on the parties’ motions for summary
judgment and took the motions under advisement.

LIBOR

The Corporation, BANA and certain Merrill Lynch entities have
been named as defendants along with most of the other LIBOR
panel banks in a number of individual and putative class actions
by persons alleging they sustained losses on U.S. dollar LIBORbased financial instruments as a result of collusion or
manipulation by defendants regarding the setting of U.S. dollar
LIBOR. Plaintiffs assert a variety of claims, including antitrust,
Commodity Exchange Act, Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations (RICO), Securities Exchange Act of 1934, common
law fraud and breach of contract claims, and seek
compensatory, treble and punitive damages, and injunctive
relief. All but one of the cases naming the Corporation and its
affiliates relating to U.S. dollar LIBOR are pending in the U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of New York (“District
Court”). The District Court has dismissed all RICO claims, and
dismissed all manipulation claims against Bank of America
entities based on alleged trader conduct. The District Court has
also substantially limited the scope of antitrust, Commodity
Exchange Act and various other claims, including by dismissing
in their entirety certain individual and putative class plaintiffs’
antitrust claims for lack of standing. On December 30, 2021,
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the
dismissal of these antitrust claims for lack of standing. Certain
individual and putative class actions remain pending against the
Corporation, BANA and certain Merrill Lynch entities. On
February 28, 2018, the District Court granted certification of a
class of persons that purchased OTC swaps and notes that
referenced U.S. dollar LIBOR from one of the U.S. dollar LIBOR
panel banks, limited to claims under Section 1 of the Sherman
Act.

Bank of America 2022 183

NOTE 13 Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock
Declared Quarterly Cash Dividends on Common Stock (1)
Declaration Date
February 1, 2023
October 19, 2022
July 20, 2022
April 27, 2022
February 2, 2022
(1)

Record Date
March 3, 2023
December 2, 2022
September 2, 2022
June 3, 2022
March 4, 2022

Payment Date
March 31, 2023
December 30, 2022
September 30, 2022
June 24, 2022
March 25, 2022

Dividend
Per Share
$
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.21
0.21

In 2022, and through February 22, 2023.

The cash dividends paid per share of common stock were $0.86
$0.78 and $0.72 for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The table below summarizes common stock repurchases
during 2022, 2021 and 2020.

Common Stock Repurchase Summary
(in millions)

Total share repurchases, including CCAR
capital plan repurchases
Purchase price of shares repurchased and
retired (1)
(1)

2022

2021

2020

126

615

227

$ 5,073

$ 25,126

$ 7,025

Consists of repurchases pursuant to the Corporation’s CCAR capital plans.

During 2022, in connection with employee stock plans, the
Corporation issued 73 million shares of its common stock and,
to satisfy tax withholding obligations, repurchased 28 million
shares of its common stock. At December 31, 2022, the
Corporation had reserved 491 million unissued shares of
common stock for future issuances under employee stock
plans, convertible notes and preferred stock.

Preferred Stock
The cash dividends declared on preferred stock were $1.6
billion in 2022 and $1.4 billion in both 2021 and 2020.
On January 25, 2022, the Corporation issued 70,000 shares
of 4.375% Fixed-Rate Reset Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock,
Series RR for $1.8 billion, with quarterly dividends commencing
in April 2022. The Series RR preferred stock has a liquidation
preference of $25,000 per share and is subject to certain
restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay
full dividends.
On January 31, 2022 the Corporation issued 28,000 shares
of 4.750% Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series SS for
$700 million, with quarterly dividends commencing in May
2022. The Series SS preferred stock has a liquidation
preference of $25,000 per share and is subject to certain
restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay
full dividends.

184 Bank of America 2022

On April 22, 2022, the Corporation issued 80,000 shares of
6.125% Fixed-Rate Reset Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock,
Series TT for $2.0 billion, with quarterly dividends commencing
in July 2022. The Series TT preferred stock has a liquidation
preference of $25,000 per share and is subject to certain
restrictions in the event the Corporation fails to declare and pay
full dividends.
Through a cash tender offer announced and completed in the
fourth quarter of 2022, the Corporation partially repurchased
Series E, Series FF, Series HH, Series JJ, Series KK, Series LL,
Series MM, Series NN, Series PP, Series QQ, Series RR, Series
SS, Series 1 and Series 5 preferred stock with a total carrying
value of $737 million for $654 million in cash, with $83 million
recognized in additional paid-in capital as a preferred stock
benefit.
All series of preferred stock in the Preferred Stock Summary
table have a par value of $0.01 per share, are not subject to
the operation of a sinking fund, have no participation rights, and
with the exception of the Series L Preferred Stock, are not
convertible. The holders of the Series B Preferred Stock and
Series 1 through 5 Preferred Stock have general voting rights
and vote together with the common stock. The holders of the
other series included in the table have no general voting rights.
All outstanding series of preferred stock of the Corporation have
preference over the Corporation’s common stock with respect to
the payment of dividends and distribution of the Corporation’s
assets in the event of a liquidation or dissolution. With the
exception of the Series B, F and G Preferred Stock, if any
dividend payable on these series is in arrears for three or more
semi-annual or six or more quarterly dividend periods, as
applicable (whether consecutive or not), the holders of these
series and any other class or series of preferred stock ranking
equally as to payment of dividends and upon which equivalent
voting rights have been conferred and are exercisable (voting as
a single class) will be entitled to vote for the election of two
additional directors. These voting rights terminate when the
Corporation has paid in full dividends on these series for at
least two semi-annual or four quarterly dividend periods, as
applicable, following the dividend arrearage.
The 7.25% Non-Cumulative Perpetual Convertible Preferred
Stock, Series L (Series L Preferred Stock) does not have early
redemption/call rights. Each share of the Series L Preferred
Stock may be converted at any time, at the option of the holder,
into 20 shares of the Corporation’s common stock plus cash in
lieu of fractional shares. The Corporation may cause some or all
of the Series L Preferred Stock, at its option, at any time or from
time to time, to be converted into shares of common stock at
the then-applicable conversion rate if, for 20 trading days during
any period of 30 consecutive trading days, the closing price of
common stock exceeds 130 percent of the then-applicable
conversion price of the Series L Preferred Stock. If a conversion
of Series L Preferred Stock occurs at the option of the holder,
subsequent to a dividend record date but prior to the dividend
payment date, the Corporation will still pay any accrued
dividends payable.

The table below presents a summary of perpetual preferred stock outstanding at December 31, 2022.

Preferred Stock Summary
(Dollars in millions, except as noted)

Series

Description

Initial
Issuance
Date

Liquidation
Preference
per Share
(in dollars)

Total
Shares
Outstanding

Carrying
Value

Per Annum
Dividend Rate

7.000% Cumulative
Redeemable

June
1997

Series E (3)

Floating Rate NonCumulative

November
2006

12,317

25,000

308

3-mo. LIBOR + 35 bps (4)

Series F

Floating Rate NonCumulative

March
2012

1,409

100,000

141

Series G

Adjustable Rate NonCumulative

March
2012

4,925

100,000

492

Series L

7.25% Non-Cumulative
Perpetual Convertible

January
2008

3,080,182

1,000

3,080

Series B

7,076

$

100

$

1

7.00 %

Dividend per
Share
(in dollars)(1)
7

$

Redemption Period (2)

—

n/a

1.01

13

On or after
November 15, 2011

3-mo. LIBOR + 40 bps (4)

4,055.56

6

On or after
March 15, 2012

3-mo. LIBOR + 40 bps (4)

4,055.56

20

On or after
March 15, 2012

7.25 %

$

Annual
Dividend

72.50

223

n/a

52.00

52

On or after
June 1, 2023

62.50

125

On or after
September 5, 2024

65.00

91

On or after
October 23, 2024

61.00

116

On or after
March 17, 2025

Series U (5)

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

May
2013

40,000

25,000

1,000

5.2% to, but excluding,
6/1/23; 3-mo. LIBOR
+313.5 bps thereafter

Series X (5)

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

September
2014

80,000

25,000

2,000

6.250% to, but excluding,
9/5/24; 3-mo. LIBOR
+370.5 bps thereafter

Series Z (5)

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

October
2014

56,000

25,000

1,400

Series AA (5)

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

March
2015

76,000

25,000

1,900

6.500% to, but excluding,
10/23/24; 3-mo. LIBOR
+417.4 bps thereafter
6.100% to, but excluding,
3/17/25; 3-mo. LIBOR
+389.8 bps thereafter

1,000

6.300% to, but excluding,
3/10/26; 3-mo. LIBOR
+455.3 bps thereafter

63.00

63

On or after
March 10, 2026

5.875% to, but excluding,
3/15/28; 3-mo. LIBOR
+293.1 bps thereafter

58.75

139

On or after
March 15, 2028

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

March
2016

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

March
2018

90,834

25,000

2,271

Series GG (3)

6.000% Non-Cumulative

May
2018

54,000

25,000

1,350

6.000 %

1.50

81

On or after
May 16, 2023

Series HH (3)

5.875% Non-Cumulative

July
2018

34,049

25,000

851

5.875 %

1.47

50

On or after
July 24, 2023

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

June
2019

34,171

25,000

854

51.25

51

On or after
June 20, 2024

Series KK (3)

5.375% Non-Cumulative

June
2019

55,273

25,000

1,382

5.375 %

1.34

75

On or after
June 25, 2024

Series LL (3)

5.000% Non-Cumulative

September
2019

52,045

25,000

1,301

5.000 %

1.25

66

On or after
September 17, 2024

Fixed-to-Floating Rate
Non-Cumulative

January
2020

30,753

25,000

769

4.300 %

43.00

46

On or after
January 28, 2025

Series NN (3)

4.375% Non-Cumulative

October
2020

42,993

25,000

1,075

4.375 %

1.09

48

On or after
November 3, 2025

Series PP (3)

4.125% Non-Cumulative

January
2021

36,500

25,000

912

4.125 %

1.03

38

On or after
February 2, 2026

Series QQ (3)

4.250% Non-Cumulative

October
2021

51,879

25,000

1,297

1.12

58

On or after
November 17, 2026

Series RR (6)

4.375% Fixed-Rate Reset
Non-Cumulative

January
2022

66,738

25,000

1,668

4.250 %
4.375% to, but excluding,
1/27/27; 5-yr U.S.
Treasury Rate +276 bps
thereafter

43.99

77

On or after
January 27, 2027

Series SS (3)

4.750% Non-Cumulative

January
2022

27,463

25,000

687

Series TT (6)

6.125% Fixed-Rate Reset
Non-Cumulative

April 2022

80,000

25,000

2,000

Series 1 (7)

Floating Rate NonCumulative

November
2004

3,186

30,000

Series 2 (7)

Floating Rate NonCumulative

March
2005

9,967

Series 4 (7)

Floating Rate NonCumulative

November
2005

Floating Rate NonCumulative
Series 5 (7)
Issuance costs and certain adjustments

March
2007

Series DD

Series FF

Series JJ

(5)

(5)

(5)

Series MM (5)

Total

40,000

25,000

5.125% to, but excluding,
6/20/24; 3-mo. LIBOR
+329.2 bps thereafter

4.750 %
6.125% to, but excluding,
4/27/27; 5-yr U.S.
Treasury Rate +323.1
bps thereafter

0.95

27

On or after
February 17, 2027

46.79

94

On or after
April 27, 2027

96

3-mo. LIBOR + 75 bps (8)

0.80

3

On or after
November 28, 2009

30,000

299

3-mo. LIBOR + 65 bps (8)

0.80

10

On or after
November 28, 2009

7,010

30,000

210

3-mo. LIBOR + 75 bps (4)

1.01

9

On or after
November 28, 2010

13,331

30,000

400

3-mo. LIBOR + 50 bps (4)

1.01

17

On or after
May 21, 2012

(347)
4,088,101

$

28,397

(1)

For all series of preferred stock other than Series B, Series F, Series G and Series L, “Dividend per Share” means the amount of dividends per depositary share of such series.
The Corporation may redeem series of preferred stock on or after the redemption date, in whole or in part, at its option, at the liquidation preference plus declared and unpaid dividends. Series B
and Series L Preferred Stock do not have early redemption/call rights.
(3)
Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th interest in a share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(4)
Subject to 4.00% minimum rate per annum.
(5)
Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/25th interest in a share of preferred stock, paying a semi-annual cash dividend, if and when declared, until the first
redemption date at which time, it adjusts to a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared, thereafter.
(6)
Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/25th interest in a share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(7)
Ownership is held in the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,200th interest in a share of preferred stock, paying a quarterly cash dividend, if and when declared.
(8)
Subject to 3.00% minimum rate per annum.
n/a = not applicable
(2)

Bank of America 2022 185

NOTE 14 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The table below presents the changes in accumulated OCI after-tax for 2022, 2021 and 2020.

(Dollars in millions)

Balance, December 31, 2019
Net change
Balance, December 31, 2020
Net change
Balance, December 31, 2021
Net change
Balance, December 31, 2022

Debt Securities
$
323
4,799
$
5,122
(2,077)
$
3,045
(6,028)
$
(2,983)

Debit Valuation
Adjustments
$
(1,494)
(498)
$
(1,992)
356
$
(1,636)
755
$
(881)

$
$
$
$

Derivatives
(400)
826
426
(2,306)
(1,880)
(10,055)
(11,935)

Employee
Benefit Plans
$
(4,168)
(98)
$
(4,266)
624
$
(3,642)
(667)
$
(4,309)

Foreign
Currency
(894)
(52)
(946)
(45)
(991)
(57)
(1,048)

$
$
$
$

Total
(6,633)
4,977
(1,656)
(3,448)
(5,104)
(16,052)
(21,156)

$
$
$
$

The table below presents the net change in fair value recorded in accumulated OCI, net realized gains and losses reclassified
into earnings and other changes for each component of OCI pre- and after-tax for 2022, 2021 and 2020.

Pretax

Tax
effect
2022

Aftertax

Pretax

$ (7,995)
(32)
(8,027)

$ 1,991
8
1,999

$ (6,004)
(24)
(6,028)

$ (2,749)
(22)
(2,771)

(Dollars in millions)

Debt securities:
Net increase (decrease) in fair value
Net realized (gains) losses reclassified into earnings (1)
Net change
Debit valuation adjustments:
Net increase (decrease) in fair value
Net realized (gains) losses reclassified into earnings (1)
Net change
Derivatives:
Net increase (decrease) in fair value
Reclassifications into earnings:
Net interest income
Compensation and benefits expense
Net realized (gains) losses reclassified into earnings
Net change
Employee benefit plans:
Net increase (decrease) in fair value
Net actuarial losses and other reclassified into earnings (2)
Settlements, curtailments and other
Net change
Foreign currency:
Net increase (decrease) in fair value
Net realized (gains) losses reclassified into earnings (1)
Net change
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
(1)
(2)

980
16
996

(237)
(4)
(241)

743
12
755

Tax
effect
2021
$

449
13
462

689
5
694

Aftertax

Pretax

Tax
effect
2020

Aftertax

$ (2,060)
(17)
(2,077)

$ 6,819
(411)
6,408

$ (1,712)
103
(1,609)

$ 5,107
(308)
4,799

(669)
19
(650)

156
(4)
152

(513)
15
(498)

(103)
(3)
(106)

346
10
356

(13,711)

3,430

(10,281)

(2,849)

703

(2,146)

1,098

(268)

830

332
(29)
303
(13,408)

(84)
7
(77)
3,353

248
(22)
226
(10,055)

(166)
(55)
(221)
(3,070)

48
13
61
764

(118)
(42)
(160)
(2,306)

6
(12)
(6)
1,092

(1)
3
2
(266)

5
(9)
(4)
826

(1,103)
198
11
(894)

276
(49)
—
227

(827)
149
11
(667)

(381)
261
5
(115)

80
(63)
—
17

(301)
198
5
(98)

(251)
(1)
(252)
$ 6,483

199
1
200
$ (1,506)

(52)
—
(52)
$ 4,977

332
(390)
—
1
332
(389)
$(21,001) $ 4,949

463
295
5
763

296
(58)
(5)
1
291
(57)
$(16,052) $ (4,325)

(72)
(67)
—
(139)

$

(341)
5
(336)
877

391
228
5
624
(45)
—
(45)
$ (3,448)

Reclassifications of pretax debt securities, DVA and foreign currency (gains) losses are recorded in other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
Reclassifications of pretax employee benefit plan costs are recorded in other general operating expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income.

NOTE 15 Earnings Per Common Share
The calculation of EPS and diluted EPS for 2022, 2021 and 2020 is presented below. For more information on the calculation of
EPS, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles.

Diluted earnings per common share
Net income applicable to common shareholders
Average common shares issued and outstanding
Dilutive potential common shares (1)
Total diluted average common shares issued and outstanding
Diluted earnings per common share
(1)

Includes incremental dilutive shares from preferred stock, restricted stock units, restricted stock and warrants.

186 Bank of America 2022

2021

2022

(In millions, except per share information)

Earnings per common share
Net income
Preferred stock dividends and other
Net income applicable to common shareholders
Average common shares issued and outstanding
Earnings per common share

$
$
$

$

$

27,528
(1,513)
26,015
8,113.7
3.21

$

26,015
8,113.7
53.8
8,167.5
3.19

$

$
$

$

2020

31,978
(1,421)
30,557
8,493.3
3.60

$

30,557
8,493.3
65.1
8,558.4
3.57

$

$
$

$

17,894
(1,421)
16,473
8,753.2
1.88

16,473
8,753.2
43.7
8,796.9
1.87

For 2022, 2021 and 2020, 62 average dilutive potential
common shares associated with the Series L preferred stock
were not included in the diluted share count because the result
would have been antidilutive under the “if-converted” method.

NOTE 16 Regulatory Requirements and
Restrictions
The Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
(OCC) and FDIC (collectively, U.S. banking regulators) jointly
establish regulatory capital adequacy rules, including Basel 3,
for U.S. banking organizations. As a financial holding company,
the Corporation is subject to capital adequacy rules issued by
the Federal Reserve. The Corporation’s banking entity affiliates
are subject to capital adequacy rules issued by the OCC.
The Corporation and its primary banking entity affiliate,
BANA, are Advanced approaches institutions under Basel 3. As
Advanced approaches institutions, the Corporation and its

banking entity affiliates are required to report regulatory riskbased capital ratios and risk-weighted assets under both the
Standardized and Advanced approaches. The approach that
yields the lower ratio is used to assess capital adequacy,
including under the Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) framework.
The Corporation is required to maintain a minimum
supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) of 3.0 percent plus a
leverage buffer of 2.0 percent in order to avoid certain
restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus
payments. The Corporation’s insured depository institution
subsidiaries are required to maintain a minimum 6.0 percent
SLR to be considered well capitalized under the PCA framework.
The table below presents capital ratios and related
information in accordance with Basel 3 Standardized and
Advanced approaches as measured at December 31, 2022 and
2021 for the Corporation and BANA.

Regulatory Capital under Basel 3
Bank of America Corporation
Standardized
Approach (1)

Advanced
Approaches (1)

Leverage-based metrics:
Adjusted quarterly average assets (in billions) (5)
Tier 1 leverage ratio

Standardized
Approach (1)

Advanced
Approaches (1)

Regulatory
Minimum (3)

December 31, 2022

(Dollars in millions, except as noted)

Risk-based capital metrics:
Common equity tier 1 capital
Tier 1 capital
Total capital (4)
Risk-weighted assets (in billions)
Common equity tier 1 capital ratio
Tier 1 capital ratio
Total capital ratio

Bank of America, N.A.

Regulatory
Minimum (2)

$ 180,060
208,446
238,773
1,605
11.2 %
13.0
14.9

$ 180,060
208,446
230,916
1,411
12.8 %
14.8
16.4

$

$

2,997
7.0 %

$

Supplementary leverage exposure (in billions)
Supplementary leverage ratio

10.4 %
11.9
13.9

2,997
7.0 %

4.0

3,523
5.9 %

5.0

$ 181,089
181,089
194,254
1,386
13.1 %
13.1
14.0

$ 181,089
181,089
186,648
1,087
16.7 %
16.7
17.2

$

$

2,358
7.7 %

$

7.0 %
8.5
10.5

2,358
7.7 %

5.0

2,785
6.5 %

6.0

December 31, 2021
Risk-based capital metrics:
Common equity tier 1 capital
Tier 1 capital
Total capital (4)
Risk-weighted assets (in billions)
Common equity tier 1 capital ratio
Tier 1 capital ratio
Total capital ratio
Leverage-based metrics:
Adjusted quarterly average assets (in billions) (5)
Tier 1 leverage ratio
Supplementary leverage exposure (in billions)
Supplementary leverage ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

$ 171,759
196,465
227,592
1,618
10.6 %
12.1
14.1

$ 171,759
196,465
220,616
1,399
12.3 %
14.0
15.8

$

$

3,087
6.4 %

$

9.5 %
11.0
13.0

3,087
6.4 %

4.0

3,604
5.5 %

5.0

$ 182,526
182,526
194,773
1,352
13.5 %
13.5
14.4

$ 182,526
182,526
188,091
1,048
17.4 %
17.4
17.9

$

$

2,414
7.6 %

$

7.0 %
8.5
10.5

2,414
7.6 %

5.0

2,824
6.5 %

6.0

As of December 31, 2022 and 2021, capital ratios are calculated using the regulatory capital rule that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of the current expected credit
losses accounting standard on January 1, 2020.
The capital conservation buffer and global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge were 2.5 percent at both December 31, 2022 and 2021. The Corporation’s stress capital buffer applied
in place of the capital conservation buffer under the Standardized approach was 3.4 percent at December 31, 2022 and 2.5 percent at December 31, 2021. The countercyclical capital buffer for
both periods was zero. The CET1 capital regulatory minimum is the sum of the CET1 capital ratio minimum of 4.5 percent, the Corporation’s G-SIB surcharge of 2.5 percent and the Corporation’s
capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent or the SCB, as applicable, of 3.4 percent at December 31, 2022 and 2.5 percent at December 31, 2021. The SLR regulatory minimum includes a
leverage buffer of 2.0 percent.
Risk-based capital regulatory minimums at December 31, 2022 and 2021 are the minimum ratios under Basel 3, including a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent. The regulatory minimums
for the leverage ratios as of both period ends are the percent required to be considered well capitalized under the PCA framework.
Total capital under the Advanced approaches differs from the Standardized approach due to differences in the amount permitted in Tier 2 capital related to the qualifying allowance for credit
losses.
Reflects total average assets adjusted for certain Tier 1 capital deductions.

Bank of America 2022 187

The capital adequacy rules issued by the U.S. banking
regulators require institutions to meet the established
minimums outlined in the table above. Failure to meet the
minimum requirements can lead to certain mandatory and
discretionary actions by regulators that could have a material
adverse impact on the Corporation’s financial position. At
December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation and its banking
entity affiliates were well capitalized.

Other Regulatory Matters
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the Corporation had cash
and cash equivalents in the amount of $5.6 billion and $4.0
billion, and securities with a fair value of $16.6 billion and
$10.6 billion that were segregated in compliance with securities
regulations. Cash and cash equivalents segregated in
compliance with securities regulations are a component of
restricted cash. For more information, see Note 10 – Securities
Financing Agreements, Short-term Borrowings, Collateral and
Restricted Cash. In addition, at December 31, 2022 and 2021,
the Corporation had cash deposited with clearing organizations
of $20.7 billion and $28.6 billion primarily recorded in other
assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.

Bank Subsidiary Distributions
The primary sources of funds for cash distributions by the
Corporation to its shareholders are capital distributions received
from its bank subsidiaries, BANA and Bank of America
California, N.A. In 2022, the Corporation received dividends of
$22.0 billion from BANA and $250 million from Bank of America
California, N.A.
The amount of dividends that a subsidiary bank may declare
in a calendar year without OCC approval is the subsidiary bank’s
net profits for that year combined with its retained net profits for
the preceding two years. Retained net profits, as defined by the
OCC, consist of net income less dividends declared during the
period. In 2023, BANA can declare and pay dividends of
approximately $16.1 billion to the Corporation plus an additional
amount equal to its retained net profits for 2023 up to the date
of any such dividend declaration. Bank of America California,
N.A. can pay dividends of $173 million in 2023 plus an
additional amount equal to its retained net profits for 2023 up
to the date of any such dividend declaration.

NOTE 17 Employee Benefit Plans
Pension and Postretirement Plans
The Corporation sponsors a qualified noncontributory trusteed
pension plan (Qualified Pension Plan), a number of
noncontributory nonqualified pension plans and postretirement
health and life plans that cover eligible employees. Non-U.S.

188 Bank of America 2022

pension plans sponsored by the Corporation vary based on the
country and local practices.
The Qualified Pension Plan has a balance guarantee feature
for account balances with participant-selected investments,
applied at the time a benefit payment is made from the plan
that effectively provides principal protection for participant
balances transferred and certain compensation credits. The
Corporation is responsible for funding any shortfall on the
guarantee feature.
Benefits earned under the Qualified Pension Plan have been
frozen. Thereafter, the cash balance accounts continue to earn
investment credits or interest credits in accordance with the
terms of the plan document.
The Corporation has an annuity contract that guarantees the
payment of benefits vested under a terminated U.S. pension
plan (Other Pension Plan). The Corporation, under a
supplemental agreement, may be responsible for or benefit from
actual experience and investment performance of the annuity
assets. The Corporation made no contribution under this
agreement in 2022 or 2021. Contributions may be required in
the future under this agreement.
The Corporation’s noncontributory, nonqualified pension
plans are unfunded and provide supplemental defined pension
benefits to certain eligible employees.
In addition to retirement pension benefits, certain benefitseligible employees may become eligible to continue participation
as retirees in health care and/or life insurance plans sponsored
by the Corporation. These plans are referred to as the
Postretirement Health and Life Plans.
The Pension and Postretirement Plans table summarizes the
changes in the fair value of plan assets, changes in the
projected benefit obligation (PBO), the funded status of both the
accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) and the PBO, and the
weighted-average assumptions used to determine benefit
obligations for the pension plans and postretirement plans at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The estimate of the
Corporation’s PBO associated with these plans considers
various actuarial assumptions, including assumptions for
mortality rates and discount rates. The discount rate
assumptions are derived from a cash flow matching technique
that utilizes rates that are based on Aa-rated corporate bonds
with cash flows that match estimated benefit payments of each
of the plans. The increases in the weighted-average discount
rates in 2022 resulted in a decrease to the PBO of $5.3 billion
at December 31, 2022. The increases in the weighted-average
discount rates in 2021 resulted in a decrease to the PBO of
approximately $895 million at December 31, 2021. Significant
gains and losses related to changes in the PBO for 2022 and
2021 primarily resulted from changes in the discount rate.

Pension and Postretirement Plans (1)
(Dollars in millions)
Fair value, January 1
Actual return on plan assets
Company contributions (withdrawals)
Plan participant contributions
Settlements and curtailments
Benefits paid
Federal subsidy on benefits paid
Foreign currency exchange rate changes
Fair value, December 31
Change in projected benefit obligation
Projected benefit obligation, January 1
Service cost
Interest cost
Plan participant contributions
Plan amendments
Settlements and curtailments
Actuarial loss (gain)
Benefits paid
Federal subsidy on benefits paid
Foreign currency exchange rate changes
Projected benefit obligation, December 31
Amounts recognized on Consolidated Balance Sheet
Other assets
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Net amount recognized, December 31
Funded status, December 31
Accumulated benefit obligation
Overfunded (unfunded) status of ABO
Provision for future salaries
Projected benefit obligation
Weighted-average assumptions, December 31
Discount rate
Rate of compensation increase
Interest-crediting rate

$

$
$

$
$
$
$

Qualified
Pension Plan
2021
2022
$ 21,776
22,078
1,215
(3,896)
—
—
—
—
—
—
(913)
(924)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
$ 22,078
17,258
15,676
—
438
—
—
—
(3,610)
(924)
n/a
n/a
11,580
5,678
—
5,678
11,580
5,678
—
11,580
5.54 %
n/a
5.36 %

$

$
$
$
$

16,427
—
414
—
—
—
(252)
(913)
n/a
n/a
15,676
6,402
—
6,402
15,676
6,402
—
15,676
2.86 %
n/a
4.83 %

$

$
$

$
$
$
$

Non-U.S.
Pension Plans
2021
2022
$
3,078
3,031
62
(898)
24
30
1
1
(11)
(51)
(84)
(62)
n/a
n/a
(39)
(323)
$
3,031
1,728
3,116
29
53
1
3
(51)
(1,054)
(62)
n/a
(283)
1,752
370
(394)
(24)
1,694
34
58
1,752

$

3,340
28
45
1
—
(11)
(152)
(84)
n/a
(51)
3,116

$
$

550
(635)
(85)

$
$

3,031
—
85
3,116
1.85 %
4.46
1.90

4.59 %
4.25
2.03

Nonqualified and Other
Pension Plans
2021
2022
$
2,789
$
2,585
(55)
(332)
87
(135)
—
—
—
(6)
(236)
(226)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
$
2,585
$
1,886
$

$
$
$
$

2,753
—
74
—
—
(6)
(486)
(226)
n/a
n/a
2,109
495
(718)
(223)
2,109
(223)
—
2,109

$

$

3,005
—
67
—
—
—
(83)
(236)
n/a
n/a
2,753

$

777
(945)
(168)

$
$

2,753
(168)
—
2,753

5.58 %
4.00
4.69

2.80 %
4.00
4.22

$

$
$

$
$
$

$

Postretirement
Health and Life Plans
2021
2022
$
143
117
—
2
38
45
107
104
—
—
(171)
(161)
—
—
n/a
n/a
$
117
107
928
4
25
104
—
—
(198)
(161)
—
(2)
700

$

—
(593)
(593)

$

n/a
n/a
n/a
700
5.56 %
n/a
n/a

$

1,007
5
24
107
—
—
(44)
(171)
—
—
928

$

—
(811)
(811)

$

n/a
n/a
n/a
928
2.85 %
n/a
n/a

(1)
The measurement date for all of the above plans was December 31 of each year reported.
n/a = not applicable

The Corporation’s estimate of its contributions to be made
to the Non-U.S. Pension Plans, Nonqualified and Other Pension
Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life Plans in 2023 is $26
million, $89 million and $22 million, respectively. The
Corporation does not expect to make a contribution to the
Qualified Pension Plan in 2023. It is the policy of the
Corporation to fund no less than the minimum funding amount

required by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (ERISA).
Pension Plans with ABO and PBO in excess of plan assets as
of December 31, 2022 and 2021 are presented in the table
below. For these plans, funding strategies vary due to legal
requirements and local practices.

Plans with ABO and PBO in Excess of Plan Assets

(Dollars in millions)

PBO
ABO
Fair value of plan assets

$

Non-U.S.
Pension Plans
2021
2022
841
458 $
780
416
207
71

$

Nonqualified
and Other
Pension Plans
2021
2022
945
719 $
945
719
1
1

Bank of America 2022 189

Components of Net Periodic Benefit Cost
Qualified Pension Plan
2021
2020
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Components of net periodic benefit cost (income)
Service cost
Interest cost
Expected return on plan assets
Amortization of actuarial loss (gain) and prior service cost
Other
Net periodic benefit cost (income)
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine net cost for years ended December 31
Discount rate
Expected return on plan assets
Rate of compensation increase

$

—
438
(1,204)
140
—
$ (626)

$

—
414
(1,173)
193
—
$ (566)

$

—
500
(1,154)
173
—
$ (481)

2.57 %
5.75
n/a

2.86 %
5.75
n/a

Non-U.S. Pension Plans
2021
2020
2022
$

$

3.32 %
6.00
n/a

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

—
74
(59)
54
1
70

$

$

—
67
(49)
63
—
81

$

2.33 %
1.88
4.00

2.80 %
2.38
4.00

28
45
(70)
19
5
27

$

$

1.35 %
2.30
4.11

20
49
(66)
9
8
20
1.81 %
2.57
4.10

Postretirement Health
and Life Plans
2021
2020
2022

1
90
(71)
50
—
70

$

$

1.85 %
2.17
4.46

Nonqualified and
Other Pension Plans
2021
2020
2022

Components of net periodic benefit cost (income)
Service cost
Interest cost
Expected return on plan assets
Amortization of actuarial loss (gain) and prior service cost
Other
Net periodic benefit cost (income)
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine net cost for years ended December 31
Discount rate
Expected return on plan assets
Rate of compensation increase

$

29
53
(59)
14
10
47

$

$

3.20 %
2.77
4.00

$

4
25
(2)
(9)
—
18

$

2.85 %
2.00
n/a

5
24
(3)
20
—
46
2.48 %
2.00
n/a

$

$

5
32
(4)
29
(2)
60
3.27 %
2.00
n/a

n/a = not applicable

The asset valuation method used to calculate the expected
return on plan assets component of net periodic benefit cost for
the Qualified Pension Plan recognizes 60 percent of the prior
year’s market gains or losses at the next measurement date
with the remaining 40 percent spread equally over the
subsequent four years.
Gains and losses for all benefit plans except postretirement
health care are recognized in accordance with the standard
amortization provisions of the applicable accounting guidance.
Net periodic postretirement health and life expense was
determined using the “projected unit credit” actuarial method.
For the Postretirement Health and Life Plans, 50 percent of the
unrecognized gain or loss at the beginning of the year (or at
subsequent remeasurement) is recognized on a level basis
during the year.

Assumed health care cost trend rates affect the
postretirement benefit obligation and benefit cost reported for
the Postretirement Health and Life Plans. The assumed health
care cost trend rate used to measure the expected cost of
benefits covered by the Postretirement Health and Life Plans is
6.50 percent for 2023, reducing in steps to 5.00 percent in
2028 and later years.
The Corporation’s net periodic benefit cost (income)
recognized for the plans is sensitive to the discount rate and
expected return on plan assets. For the Qualified Pension Plan,
Non-U.S. Pension Plans, Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans,
and Postretirement Health and Life Plans, a 25 bp decline in
discount rates and expected return on assets would not have
had a significant impact on the net periodic benefit cost for
2022.

Pretax Amounts included in Accumulated OCI and OCI

(Dollars in millions)

Net actuarial loss (gain)
Prior service cost (credits)
Amounts recognized in accumulated OCI
Current year actuarial loss (gain)
Amortization of actuarial gain (loss) and
prior service cost
Current year prior service cost (credit)
Amounts recognized in OCI

190 Bank of America 2022

Qualified
Pension Plan
2021
2022
$ 4,775 $ 3,425
—
—
$ 4,775 $ 3,425

Non-U.S.
Pension Plans
2021
2022
$ 312 $ 456
17
43
$ 355 $ 473

Nonqualified
and Other
Pension Plans
2021
2022
$ 796 $ 945
—
—
$ 796 $ 945

$ 1,490

$ (294)

$ (107)

$ (154)

$

(140)
—
$ 1,350

(193)
—
$ (487)

(14)
3
$ (118)

(19)
—
$ (173)

(54)
—
$ (149)

(95)

Postretirement
Health and
Life Plans
2021
2022
4
$ (187) $
(3)
(1)
1
$ (188) $

$

21

$ (198)

$

(63)
—
(42)

9
—
$ (189)

Total
2021
2022
$ 5,696 $ 4,830
14
42
$ 5,738 $ 4,844

$

(41)

$ 1,090

$ (468)

$

(20)
—
(61)

(199)
3
$ 894

(295)
—
$ (763)

Plan Assets
The Qualified Pension Plan has been established as a
retirement vehicle for participants, and trusts have been
established to secure benefits promised under the Qualified
Pension Plan. The Corporation’s policy is to invest the trust
assets in a prudent manner for the exclusive purpose of
providing benefits to participants and defraying reasonable
expenses of administration. The Corporation’s investment
strategy is designed to provide a total return that, over the long
term, increases the ratio of assets to liabilities. The strategy
attempts to maximize the investment return on assets at a level
of risk deemed appropriate by the Corporation while complying
with ERISA and any applicable regulations and laws. The
investment strategy utilizes asset allocation as a principal
determinant for establishing the risk/return profile of the
assets. Asset allocation ranges are established, periodically
reviewed and adjusted as funding levels and liability
characteristics change. Active and passive investment
managers are employed to help enhance the risk/return profile
of the assets. An additional aspect of the investment strategy
used to minimize risk (part of the asset allocation plan) includes
matching the exposure of participant-selected investment
measures.
The assets of the Non-U.S. Pension Plans are primarily
attributable to a U.K. pension plan. This U.K. pension plan’s
assets are invested prudently so that the benefits promised to
members are provided with consideration given to the nature
and the duration of the plans’ liabilities. The selected asset

allocation strategy is designed to achieve a higher return than
the lowest risk strategy.
The expected rate of return on plan assets assumption was
developed through analysis of historical market returns,
historical asset class volatility and correlations, current market
conditions, anticipated future asset allocations, the funds’ past
experience and expectations on potential future market returns.
The expected return on plan assets assumption is determined
using the calculated market-related value for the Qualified
Pension Plan and the Other Pension Plan and the fair value for
the Non-U.S. Pension Plans and Postretirement Health and Life
Plans. The expected return on plan assets assumption
represents a long-term average view of the performance of the
assets in the Qualified Pension Plan, the Non-U.S. Pension
Plans, the Other Pension Plan, and Postretirement Health and
Life Plans, a return that may or may not be achieved during any
one calendar year. The Other Pension Plan is invested solely in
an annuity contract, which is primarily invested in fixed-income
securities structured such that asset maturities match the
duration of the plan’s obligations.
The target allocations for 2023 by asset category for the
Qualified Pension Plan, Non-U.S. Pension Plans, and
Nonqualified and Other Pension Plans are presented in the table
below. Equity securities for the Qualified Pension Plan include
common stock of the Corporation in the amounts of $296
million (1.72 percent of total plan assets) and $398 million
(1.80 percent of total plan assets) at December 31, 2022 and
2021.

2023 Target Allocation
Percentage

Asset Category
Equity securities
Debt securities
Real estate
Other

Qualified
Pension Plan
15 - 50%
45 - 80%
0 - 10%
0 - 5%

Non-U.S.
Pension Plans
0 - 20%
40 - 75%
0 - 15%
10 - 40%

Nonqualified
and Other
Pension Plans
0 - 5%
95 - 100%
0 - 5%
0 - 5%

Fair Value Measurements
For more information on fair value measurements, including descriptions of Level 1, 2 and 3 of the fair value hierarchy and the
valuation methods employed by the Corporation, see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles and Note 20 – Fair Value
Measurements. Combined plan investment assets measured at fair value by level and in total at December 31, 2022 and 2021 are
summarized in the Fair Value Measurements table.

Bank of America 2022 191

Fair Value Measurements
Level 1
(Dollars in millions)

Money market and interest-bearing cash
U.S. government and government agency obligations
Corporate debt
Non-U.S. debt securities
Asset-backed securities
Mutual and exchange-traded funds
Collective investment funds
Common and preferred stocks
Real estate investment trusts
Participant loans
Other investments (1)
Total plan investment assets, at fair value (2)
(1)
(2)

$

$

1,329
3,313
—
327
—
1,247
—
3,901
76
—
1
10,194

Level 2
Level 3
December 31, 2022
$
— $
—
704
5
3,587
—
933
—
1,273
—
—
—
1,988
—
—
—
—
—
—
6
23
410
$
8,508 $
421

Total
$

$

1,329
4,022
3,587
1,260
1,273
1,247
1,988
3,901
76
6
434
19,123

Level 1
$

1,339
4,948
—
925
—
1,395
—
4,826
87
—
1
$ 13,521

Level 2
Level 3
December 31, 2021
$
— $
—
934
6
4,900
—
1,165
—
1,485
—
—
—
3,419
—
—
—
—
—
—
7
29
630
$ 11,932 $
643

Total
$

1,339
5,888
4,900
2,090
1,485
1,395
3,419
4,826
87
7
660
$ 26,096

Other investments includes insurance annuity contracts of $390 million and $612 million and other various investments of $44 million and $48 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, excludes $1.9 billion and $1.7 billion of certain investments that are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent) as a practical
expedient and are not required to be classified in the fair value hierarchy.

The Level 3 Fair Value Measurements table presents a reconciliation of all plan investment assets measured at fair value using
significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) during 2022, 2021 and 2020.

Level 3 Fair Value Measurements
Actual Return on
Plan Assets Still
Held at the
Reporting Date

Balance
January 1
(Dollars in millions)

U.S. government and government agency obligations
Participant Loans
Other investments
Total

U.S. government and government agency obligations
Participant Loans
Other investments
Total

U.S. government and government agency obligations
Participant loans
Other investments
Total

$

$

$

$

$

$

6
7
630
643

7
7
684
698

8
8
628
644

$

$

$

$

$

$

Purchases, Sales
and Settlements

2022
— $
—
(8)
(8) $

(1)
(1)
(212)
(214)

2021
— $
—
(5)
(5) $

(1)
—
(49)
(50)

2020
— $
—
6
6 $

(1)
(1)
50
48

Balance
December 31
$

$

$

$

$

$

5
6
410
421

6
7
630
643

7
7
684
698

Projected Benefit Payments
Benefit payments projected to be made from the Qualified Pension Plan, Non-U.S. Pension Plans, Nonqualified and Other Pension
Plans, and Postretirement Health and Life Plans are presented in the table below.

Projected Benefit Payments

(Dollars in millions)

2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028 - 2032
(1)
(2)
(3)

Qualified
Pension Plan (1)
$
892
927
918
921
908
4,289

Non-U.S.
Pension Plans (2)
$
114
108
116
117
114
580

Benefit payments expected to be made from the plan’s assets.
Benefit payments expected to be made from a combination of the plans’ and the Corporation’s assets.
Benefit payments (net of retiree contributions) expected to be made from a combination of the plans’ and the Corporation’s assets.

192 Bank of America 2022

Nonqualified
and Other
Pension Plans (2)
$
235
232
223
215
209
884

Postretirement
Health and
Life Plans (3)
$
73
70
67
64
61
263

Defined Contribution Plans

Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units

The Corporation maintains qualified and non-qualified defined
contribution retirement plans. The Corporation recorded expense
of $1.2 billion in 2022, 2021 and 2020 related to the qualified
defined contribution plans. At December 31, 2022 and 2021,
179 million and 173 million shares of the Corporation’s
common stock were held by these plans. Payments to the plans
for dividends on common stock were $153 million, $139 million
and $138 million in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Certain non-U.S. employees are covered under defined
contribution pension plans that are separately administered in
accordance with local laws.

The total fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units
vested in 2022, 2021 and 2020 was $3.4 billion, $2.3 billion
and $2.3 billion, respectively. The table below presents the
status at December 31, 2022 of the share-settled restricted
stock and restricted stock units and changes during 2022.

NOTE 18 Stock-based Compensation Plans
The Corporation administers a number of equity compensation
plans, with awards being granted predominantly from the Bank
of America Corporation Equity Plan (BACEP). Under this plan,
715 million shares of the Corporation’s common stock are
authorized to be used for grants of awards.
During 2022 and 2021, the Corporation granted 102 million
and 99 million RSU awards to certain employees under the
BACEP. These RSUs were authorized to settle predominantly in
shares of common stock of the Corporation. Certain RSUs will
be settled in cash or contain settlement provisions that subject
these awards to variable accounting whereby compensation
expense is adjusted to fair value based on changes in the share
price of the Corporation’s common stock up to the settlement
date. The RSUs granted in 2022 will generally vest over four
years. Of the RSUs granted in 2021, 81 million will generally
vest over four years and 18 million will vest over three years.
The four-year awards vest primarily in one-fourth increments on
each of the first four anniversaries of the grant date while the
three-year awards vest primarily in one-third increments on each
of the first three anniversaries of the grant date, provided that
the employee remains continuously employed with the
Corporation during that time, and will be expensed ratably over
the vesting period, net of estimated forfeitures, for nonretirement eligible employees based on the grant-date fair value
of the shares. Of the RSUs granted in 2022 and 2021 that vest
over four years, 39 million and 27 million do not include
retirement eligibility. For all other RSUs granted to employees
who are retirement eligible, they are deemed authorized as of
the beginning of the year preceding the grant date when the
incentive award plans are generally approved. As a result, the
estimated value is expensed ratably over the year preceding the
grant date. The compensation cost for the stock-based plans
was $2.9 billion, $3.0 billion and $2.1 billion, and the related
income tax benefit was $697 million, $723 million and $505
million for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. At
December 31, 2022, there was an estimated $3.6 billion of
total unrecognized compensation cost related to certain sharebased compensation awards that is expected to be recognized
over a period of up to four years, with a weighted-average period
of 2.7 years.

Stock-settled Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock
Units
Shares/Units
185,050,842
100,108,395
(73,288,792)
(9,310,647)
202,559,798

Outstanding at January 1, 2022
Granted
Vested
Canceled
Outstanding at December 31, 2022

Weightedaverage Grant
Date Fair Value
$
31.54
46.10
30.85
39.80
38.60

NOTE 19 Income Taxes
The components of income tax expense for 2022, 2021 and
2020 are presented in the table below.

Income Tax Expense
Current income tax expense
U.S. federal
U.S. state and local
Non-U.S.
Total current expense
Deferred income tax expense
U.S. federal
U.S. state and local
Non-U.S.
Total deferred expense
Total income tax expense

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

1,157
389
1,156
2,702
110
254
375
739
3,441

$

$

1,076
775
985
2,836
962
491
(2,291)
(838)
1,998

2020
$

$

1,092
1,076
670
2,838
(799)
(233)
(705)
(1,737)
1,101

Total income tax expense does not reflect the tax effects of
items that are included in OCI each period. For more
information, see Note 14 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income (Loss). Other tax effects included in OCI each period
resulted in a benefit of $4.9 billion and $877 million in 2022
and 2021 and an expense of $1.5 billion in 2020.
Income tax expense for 2022, 2021 and 2020 varied from
the amount computed by applying the statutory income tax rate
to income before income taxes. The Corporation’s federal
statutory tax rate was 21 percent for 2022, 2021 and 2020. A
reconciliation of the expected U.S. federal income tax expense,
calculated by applying the federal statutory tax rate, to the
Corporation’s actual income tax expense, and the effective tax
rates for 2022, 2021 and 2020 are presented in the following
table.

Bank of America 2022 193

Reconciliation of Income Tax Expense
Amount
(Dollars in millions)

Expected U.S. federal income tax expense
Increase (decrease) in taxes resulting from:
State tax expense, net of federal benefit
Affordable housing/energy/other credits
Tax-exempt income, including dividends
Changes in prior-period UTBs, including interest
Rate differential on non-U.S. earnings
Nondeductible expenses
Tax law changes
Other
Total income tax expense

$

$

Tax Law changes reflect the impact of the 2022, 2021 and
2020 U.K. enacted corporate income tax rate changes, which
resulted in a negative tax adjustment of approximately
$186 million in 2022 and positive income tax adjustments of
approximately $2.0 billion and $700 million in 2021 and 2020,
with corresponding adjustments of U.K. net deferred tax assets.
The U.K. net deferred tax assets are primarily net operating
losses (NOLs), incurred by the Corporation’s U.K. broker-dealer
entity in historical periods, which do not expire under U.K. tax
law and are assessed regularly for impairment. If further U.K.
tax law changes are enacted, a corresponding income tax
adjustment will be made based on the amount of available net
deferred tax assets and applicable tax rate changes.
Tax credits originate from ESG investments in affordable
housing and renewable energy partnerships and similar entities.
Significant increases in the tax credits recognized over the last
three annual periods have been primarily driven by the
Corporation’s continued growth in the volume of investments in
wind and solar energy production facilities, consistent with the
Corporation’s commitment to support the transition to a lower
carbon economy. For additional information, see Note 6 –
Securitizations and Other Variable Interest Entities.
The reconciliation of the beginning unrecognized tax benefits
(UTB) balance to the ending balance is presented in the table
below.

Reconciliation of the Change in Unrecognized Tax
Benefits
(Dollars in millions)

Balance, January 1
Increases related to positions taken
during the current year
Increases related to positions taken
during prior years (1)
Decreases related to positions
taken during prior years (1)
Settlements
Expiration of statute of limitations
Balance, December 31
(1)

$

$

2022
1,322

$

2021
1,340

$

2020
1,175

121

208

238

167

265

99

(289)
(99)
(166)
1,056

(413)
(23)
(55)
1,322

$

$

(172)
—
—
1,340

The sum of the positions taken during prior years differs from the $(273) million,
$(155) million and $(41) million in the Reconciliation of Income Tax Expense table due to
temporary items, state items and jurisdictional offsets, as well as the inclusion of interest in
the Reconciliation of Income Tax Expense table.

194 Bank of America 2022

2022
6,504
756
(3,698)
(273)
(273)
368
352
186
(481)
3,441

Amount

Percent
21.0 %
2.4
(11.9)
(0.9)
(0.9)
1.2
1.1
0.6
(1.5)
11.1 %

$

$

2021
7,135
1,087
(3,795)
(352)
(155)
45
206
(2,050)
(123)
1,998

Percent
21.0 %
3.2
(11.2)
(1.0)
(0.5)
0.1
0.6
(6.0)
(0.3)
5.9 %

Amount

Percent

$

2020
3,989

21.0 %

$

728
(2,869)
(346)
(41)
218
324
(699)
(203)
1,101

3.8
(15.1)
(1.8)
(0.2)
1.1
1.7
(3.7)
(1.0)
5.8 %

At December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, the balance of the
Corporation’s UTBs which would, if recognized, affect the
Corporation’s effective tax rate was $709 million, $959 million
and $976 million, respectively. Included in the UTB balance are
some items the recognition of which would not affect the
effective tax rate, such as the tax effect of certain temporary
differences, the portion of gross state UTBs that would be offset
by the tax benefit of the associated federal deduction and the
portion of gross non-U.S. UTBs that would be offset by tax
reductions in other jurisdictions.
It is reasonably possible that the UTB balance may decrease
by as much as $375 million during the next 12 months, since
resolved items will be removed from the balance whether their
resolution results in payment or recognition.
The Corporation recognized an interest benefit of $50 million
in 2022 and interest expense of $32 million and $9 million in
2021 and 2020. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
Corporation’s accrual for interest and penalties that related to
income taxes, net of taxes and remittances, was $107 million
and $167 million.
The Corporation files income tax returns in more than 100
state and non-U.S. jurisdictions each year. The IRS and other
tax authorities in countries and states in which the Corporation
has significant business operations examine tax returns
periodically (continuously in some jurisdictions). The table below
summarizes the status of examinations by major jurisdiction for
the Corporation and various subsidiaries at December 31,
2022.

Tax Examination Status

United States
California
California
California
New York
United Kingdom (2)
(1)
(2)

Years under
Examination (1)
2017-2021
2012-2014
2015-2017
2018-2020
2019-2021
2019-2020

Status at
December 31
2022
Field Examination
Appeals
Field Examination
To begin in 2023
To begin in 2023
Field Examination

All tax years subsequent to the years shown remain subject to examination.
Field examination for tax year 2021 to begin in 2023.

Significant components of the Corporation’s net deferred tax
assets and liabilities at December 31, 2022 and 2021 are
presented in the following table.

NOTE 20 Fair Value Measurements

Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities
December 31
2021
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Deferred tax assets
Net operating loss carryforwards
Security, loan and debt valuations
Allowance for credit losses
Lease liability
Employee compensation and retirement benefits
Accrued expenses

$

Available-for-sale securities
Credit carryforwards
Other
Gross deferred tax assets
Valuation allowance
Total deferred tax assets, net of valuation
allowance
Deferred tax liabilities
Equipment lease financing
Right-of-use asset
ESG-related tax credit investments
Fixed Assets
Available-for-sale securities
Other
Gross deferred tax liabilities
Net deferred tax assets

$

9,029
4,788
3,503
2,443
1,625
1,143

$

9,360
2,746
3,097
2,508
1,392
1,626

960
769
1,371
25,631
(2,133)

—
705
1,160
22,594
(1,988)

23,498

20,606

2,432
2,303
1,759
1,200
—
2,459
10,153
13,345

3,083
2,358
1,387
2,082
1,016
1,527
11,453
$
9,153

The table below summarizes the deferred tax assets and related
valuation allowances recognized for the net operating loss (NOL)
and tax credit carryforwards at December 31, 2022.

Net Operating Loss and Tax Credit Carryforward Deferred
Tax Assets

(Dollars in millions)

Net operating losses U.K. (1)
Net operating losses other non-U.S.
Net operating losses U.S. states (2)
Foreign tax credits
(1)
(2)

Deferred
Tax Asset
$

7,661

Valuation
Allowance
$

—

Net
Deferred
Tax Asset
$

First Year
Expiring

7,661

None

331

(147)

184

Various

1,036

(627)

409

Various

769

(769)

—

After 2028

Represents U.K. broker-dealer net operating losses that may be carried forward indefinitely.
The net operating losses and related valuation allowances for U.S. states before considering
the benefit of federal deductions were $1.3 billion and $794 million.

Management concluded that no valuation allowance was
necessary to reduce the deferred tax assets related to the U.K.
NOL carryforwards and U.S. federal and certain state NOL
carryforwards since estimated future taxable income will be
sufficient to utilize these assets prior to their expiration. The
majority of the Corporation’s U.K. net deferred tax assets, which
consist primarily of NOLs, are expected to be realized by certain
subsidiaries over an extended number of years. Management’s
conclusion is supported by financial results, profit forecasts for
the relevant entities and the indefinite period to carry forward
NOLs. However, a material change in those estimates could
lead management to reassess such valuation allowance
conclusions.
At December 31, 2022, U.S. federal income taxes had not
been provided on approximately $5.0 billion of temporary
differences associated with investments in non-U.S.
subsidiaries that are essentially permanent in duration. If the
Corporation were to record the associated deferred tax liability,
the amount would be approximately $1.0 billion.

Under applicable accounting standards, fair value is defined as
the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid
to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most
advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants on the measurement
date. The Corporation determines the fair values of its financial
instruments under applicable accounting standards that require
an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize
the use of unobservable inputs. The Corporation categorizes its
financial instruments into three levels based on the established
fair value hierarchy and conducts a review of fair value hierarchy
classifications on a quarterly basis. Transfers into or out of fair
value hierarchy classifications are made if the significant inputs
used in the financial models measuring the fair values of the
assets and liabilities become unobservable or observable in the
current marketplace. For more information regarding the fair
value hierarchy and how the Corporation measures fair value,
see Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Principles. The
Corporation accounts for certain financial instruments under the
fair value option. For more information, see Note 21 – Fair Value
Option.

Valuation Techniques
The following sections outline the valuation methodologies for
the Corporation’s assets and liabilities. While the Corporation
believes its valuation methods are appropriate and consistent
with other market participants, the use of different
methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of
certain financial instruments could result in a different estimate
of fair value at the reporting date.
During 2022, there were no significant changes to valuation
approaches or techniques that had, or are expected to have, a
material impact on the Corporation’s consolidated financial
position or results of operations.

Trading Account Assets and Liabilities and Debt Securities
The fair values of trading account assets and liabilities are
primarily based on actively traded markets where prices are
based on either direct market quotes or observed transactions.
The fair values of debt securities are generally based on quoted
market prices or market prices for similar assets. Liquidity is a
significant factor in the determination of the fair values of
trading account assets and liabilities and debt securities.
Market price quotes may not be readily available for some
positions such as positions within a market sector where
trading activity has slowed significantly or ceased. Some of
these instruments are valued using a discounted cash flow
model, which estimates the fair value of the securities using
internal credit risk, and interest rate and prepayment risk
models that incorporate management’s best estimate of current
key assumptions such as default rates, loss severity and
prepayment rates. Principal and interest cash flows are
discounted using an observable discount rate for similar
instruments with adjustments that management believes a
market participant would consider in determining fair value for
the specific security. Other instruments are valued using a net
asset value approach which considers the value of the
underlying securities. Underlying assets are valued using
external pricing services, where available, or matrix pricing
based on the vintages and ratings. Situations of illiquidity
generally are triggered by the market’s perception of credit
uncertainty regarding a single company or a specific market
sector. In these instances, fair value is determined based on
limited available market information and other factors,

Bank of America 2022 195

principally from reviewing the issuer’s financial statements and
changes in credit ratings made by one or more rating agencies.

Derivative Assets and Liabilities
The fair values of derivative assets and liabilities traded in the
OTC market are determined using quantitative models that
utilize multiple market inputs including interest rates, prices and
indices to generate continuous yield or pricing curves and
volatility factors to value the position. The majority of market
inputs are actively quoted and can be validated through external
sources, including brokers, market transactions and third-party
pricing services. When third-party pricing services are used, the
methods and assumptions are reviewed by the Corporation.
Estimation risk is greater for derivative asset and liability
positions that are either option-based or have longer maturity
dates where observable market inputs are less readily available,
or are unobservable, in which case, quantitative-based
extrapolations of rate, price or index scenarios are used in
determining fair values. The fair values of derivative assets and
liabilities include adjustments for market liquidity, counterparty
credit quality and other instrument-specific factors, where
appropriate. In addition, the Corporation incorporates within its
fair value measurements of OTC derivatives a valuation
adjustment to reflect the credit risk associated with the net
position. Positions are netted by counterparty, and fair value for
net long exposures is adjusted for counterparty credit risk while
the fair value for net short exposures is adjusted for the
Corporation’s own credit risk. The Corporation also incorporates
FVA within its fair value measurements to include funding costs
on uncollateralized derivatives and derivatives where the
Corporation is not permitted to use the collateral it receives. An
estimate of severity of loss is also used in the determination of
fair value, primarily based on market data.

Loans and Loan Commitments
The fair values of loans and loan commitments are based on
market prices, where available, or discounted cash flow
analyses using market-based credit spreads of comparable debt
instruments or credit derivatives of the specific borrower or
comparable borrowers. Results of discounted cash flow
analyses may be adjusted, as appropriate, to reflect other
market conditions or the perceived credit risk of the borrower.

Mortgage Servicing Rights
The fair values of MSRs are primarily determined using an
option-adjusted spread valuation approach, which factors in
prepayment risk to determine the fair value of MSRs. This
approach consists of projecting servicing cash flows under
multiple interest rate scenarios and discounting these cash
flows using risk-adjusted discount rates.

196 Bank of America 2022

Loans Held-for-sale
The fair values of LHFS are based on quoted market prices,
where available, or are determined by discounting estimated
cash flows using interest rates approximating the Corporation’s
current origination rates for similar loans adjusted to reflect the
inherent credit risk. The borrower-specific credit risk is
embedded within the quoted market prices or is implied by
considering loan performance when selecting comparables.

Short-term Borrowings and Long-term Debt
The Corporation issues structured liabilities that have coupons
or repayment terms linked to the performance of debt or equity
securities, interest rates, indices, currencies or commodities.
The fair values of these structured liabilities are estimated using
quantitative models for the combined derivative and debt
portions of the notes. These models incorporate observable
and, in some instances, unobservable inputs including security
prices, interest rate yield curves, option volatility, currency,
commodity or equity rates and correlations among these inputs.
The Corporation also considers the impact of its own credit
spread in determining the discount rate used to value these
liabilities. The credit spread is determined by reference to
observable spreads in the secondary bond market.

Securities Financing Agreements
The fair values of certain reverse repurchase agreements,
repurchase agreements and securities borrowed transactions
are determined using quantitative models, including discounted
cash flow models that require the use of multiple market inputs
including interest rates and spreads to generate continuous
yield or pricing curves, and volatility factors. The majority of
market inputs are actively quoted and can be validated through
external sources, including brokers, market transactions and
third-party pricing services.

Deposits
The fair values of deposits are determined using quantitative
models, including discounted cash flow models that require the
use of multiple market inputs including interest rates and
spreads to generate continuous yield or pricing curves, and
volatility factors. The majority of market inputs are actively
quoted and can be validated through external sources, including
brokers, market transactions and third-party pricing services.
The Corporation considers the impact of its own credit spread in
the valuation of these liabilities. The credit risk is determined by
reference to observable credit spreads in the secondary cash
market.

Asset-backed Secured Financings
The fair values of asset-backed secured financings are based on
external broker bids, where available, or are determined by
discounting estimated cash flows using interest rates
approximating the Corporation’s current origination rates for
similar loans adjusted to reflect the inherent credit risk.

Recurring Fair Value
Assets and liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31, 2022 and 2021, including financial instruments that
the Corporation accounts for under the fair value option, are summarized in the following tables.
December 31, 2022
Fair Value Measurements
Level 1

(Dollars in millions)

Assets
Time deposits placed and other short-term investments
$
Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell
Trading account assets:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS:
U.S. government-sponsored agency guaranteed
Mortgage trading loans, ABS and other MBS
Total trading account assets (2)
Derivative assets
AFS debt securities:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Mortgage-backed securities:
Agency
Agency-collateralized mortgage obligations
Non-agency residential
Commercial
Non-U.S. securities
Other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total AFS debt securities
Other debt securities carried at fair value:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Non-agency residential MBS
Non-U.S. and other securities
Total other debt securities carried at fair value
Loans and leases
Loans held-for-sale
Other assets (3)
Total assets (4)
Liabilities
Interest-bearing deposits in U.S. offices
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under
agreements to repurchase
Trading account liabilities:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Corporate securities and other
Total trading account liabilities
Derivative liabilities
Short-term borrowings
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Long-term debt
Total liabilities (4)
(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

Level 2
868

$

Netting
Adjustments (1)

Level 3
—

$

—

$

$

868

—

146,999

—

—

146,999

58,894
—
77,868
7,392

212
46,897
35,065
26,306

—
2,384
145
518

—
—
—
—

59,106
49,281
113,078
34,216

—
—

28,563
10,312

34
1,518

—
—

28,597
11,830

144,154
14,775

147,355
380,380

4,599
3,213

158,102

920

—

—

159,022

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
158,102

23,442
2,221
128
6,407
13,212
4,645
11,207
62,182

—
—
258
—
195
—
51
504

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

23,442
2,221
386
6,407
13,407
4,645
11,258
220,788

561
—
3,027
3,588
—
—
6,898

—
248
5,251
5,499
5,518
883
897

—
119
—
119
253
232
1,799

—
—
—
—
—
—
—

561
367
8,278
9,206
5,771
1,115
9,594

—
(349,726)

$

328,385

$

749,713

$

10,719

$

$

—

$

311

$

—

$

$

—

Assets/Liabilities
at Fair Value

—

151,708

—

13,906
36,937
9,636
—
60,479
15,431
—
7,458
—

181
4,825
8,228
6,628
19,862
376,979
818
2,262
32,208

—
—
—
58
58
6,106
14
32
862

83,368

$

584,148

$

7,072

(349,726)
—

296,108
48,642

$

739,091

$

311

—

151,708

—
—
—
—
—
(353,700)
—
—
—
$

(353,700)

14,087
41,762
17,864
6,686
80,399
44,816
832
9,752
33,070
$

320,888

Amounts represent the impact of legally enforceable master netting agreements and also cash collateral held or placed with the same counterparties.
Includes securities with a fair value of $16.6 billion that were segregated in compliance with securities regulations or deposited with clearing organizations. This amount is included in the
parenthetical disclosure on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Trading account assets also includes certain commodities inventory of $40 million that is accounted for at the lower of cost or net
realizable value, which is the current selling price less any costs to sell.
Includes MSRs of $1.0 billion, which are classified as Level 3 assets.
Total recurring Level 3 assets were 0.35 percent of total consolidated assets, and total recurring Level 3 liabilities were 0.25 percent of total consolidated liabilities.

Bank of America 2022 197

December 31, 2021
Fair Value Measurements
Level 1

(Dollars in millions)

Assets
Time deposits placed and other short-term investments
$
Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under
agreements to resell
Trading account assets:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS:
U.S. government-sponsored agency guaranteed
Mortgage trading loans, ABS and other MBS
Total trading account assets (2)
Derivative assets
AFS debt securities:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Mortgage-backed securities:
Agency
Agency-collateralized mortgage obligations
Non-agency residential
Commercial
Non-U.S. securities
Other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total AFS debt securities
Other debt securities carried at fair value:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Non-agency residential MBS
Non-U.S. and other securities
Total other debt securities carried at fair value
Loans and leases
Loans held-for-sale
Other assets (3)
Total assets (4)
Liabilities
Interest-bearing deposits in U.S. offices
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under
agreements to repurchase
Trading account liabilities:
U.S. Treasury and government agencies
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Corporate securities and other
Total trading account liabilities
Derivative liabilities
Short-term borrowings
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Long-term debt
Total liabilities (4)
(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

Level 2

707

$

Netting
Adjustments (1)

Level 3
—

$

—

$

$

707

—

150,665

—

—

150,665

44,599
—
61,425
3,822

803
31,601
38,383
25,612

—
2,110
190
396

—
—
—
—

45,402
33,711
99,998
29,830

—
—

25,645
10,967

109
1,418

—
—

25,754
12,385

109,846
34,748

133,011
310,581

4,223
3,133

198,071

1,074

—

—

199,145

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
198,071

46,339
3,380
267
19,604
11,933
2,690
15,381
100,668

—
—
316
—
—
71
52
439

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

46,339
3,380
583
19,604
11,933
2,761
15,433
299,178

575
—
2,580
3,155
—
—
7,657

—
343
5,155
5,498
7,071
4,138
2,915

—
242
—
242
748
317
1,572

—
—
—
—
—
—
—

575
585
7,735
8,895
7,819
4,455
12,144

—
(313,118)

$

354,184

$

714,547

$

10,674

$

$

—

$

408

$

—

$

$

—

Assets/Liabilities
at Fair Value

(313,118)
—

247,080
35,344

$

766,287

$

408

—

139,641

—

—

139,641

19,826
41,744
10,400
—
71,970
35,282
—
8,359
—

313
6,491
13,781
8,124
28,709
314,380
4,279
3,130
28,633

—
—
—
11
11
5,795
—
—
1,075

—
—
—
—
—
(317,782)
—
—
—

20,139
48,235
24,181
8,135
100,690
37,675
4,279
11,489
29,708

115,611

$

519,180

$

6,881

$

(317,782)

$

323,890

Amounts represent the impact of legally enforceable master netting agreements and also cash collateral held or placed with the same counterparties.
Includes securities with a fair value of $10.6 billion that were segregated in compliance with securities regulations or deposited with clearing organizations. This amount is included in the
parenthetical disclosure on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Trading account assets also includes certain commodities inventory of $752 million that is accounted for at the lower of cost or net
realizable value, which is the current selling price less any costs to sell.
Includes MSRs of $818 million, which are classified as Level 3 assets.
Total recurring Level 3 assets were 0.34 percent of total consolidated assets, and total recurring Level 3 liabilities were 0.24 percent of total consolidated liabilities.

198 Bank of America 2022

The following tables present a reconciliation of all assets
and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis using
significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) during 2022, 2021 and
2020, including net realized and unrealized gains (losses)
included in earnings and accumulated OCI. Transfers into Level
3 occur primarily due to decreased price observability, and

transfers out of Level 3 occur primarily due to increased price
observability. Transfers occur on a regular basis for long-term
debt instruments due to changes in the impact of unobservable
inputs on the value of the embedded derivative in relation to the
instrument as a whole.

Level 3 – Fair Value Measurements (1)

Balance
January 1

Year Ended December 31, 2022
Trading account assets:
Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS
Total trading account assets
Net derivative assets (liabilities) (4)
AFS debt securities:
Non-agency residential MBS
Non-U.S. and other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total AFS debt securities
Other debt securities carried at fair value – Nonagency residential MBS
Loans and leases (5,6)
Loans held-for-sale (5,6)
Other assets (6,7)
Trading account liabilities – Corporate securities
and other
Short-term borrowings (5)
Accrued expenses and other liabilities (5)
Long-term debt (5)
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Trading account assets:
Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS
Total trading account assets
Net derivative assets (liabilities) (4)
AFS debt securities:
Non-agency residential MBS
Non-U.S. and other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total AFS debt securities
Other debt securities carried at fair value – Nonagency residential MBS
Loans and leases (5,6)
Loans held-for-sale (5,6)
Other assets (6,7)
Trading account liabilities – Corporate securities
and other
Long-term debt (5)
(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Total
Realized/
Unrealized
Gains
(Losses) in
Net
Income (2)

2,110
190
396
1,527
4,223
(2,662)

Gains
(Losses)
in OCI (3)

Gross
Purchases

Sales

Issuances

Settlements

Gross
Transfers
into
Level 3

Gross
Transfers
out of
Level 3

Balance
December 31

(52)
(3)
59
(254)
(250)
551

(2)
—
16
—
14
—

1,069
45
54
729
1,897
319

(384)
(25)
(4)
(665)
(1,078)
(830)

—
—
—
—
—
—

(606)
(4)
(68)
(112)
(790)
294

1,023
38
75
536
1,672
(180)

—
10
—
10

(35)
(10)
1
(44)

—
126
—
126

(8)
—
—
(8)

—
—
—
—

(75)
(22)
(3)
(100)

73
311
1
385

(13)
(291)
—
(304)

258
195
51
504

242
748
317
1,572

(19)
(45)
9
305

—
—
4
(21)

—
—
171
39

—
(154)
(6)
(35)

—
82
—
208

(111)
(129)
(271)
(271)

30
—
8
5

(23)
(249)
—
(3)

119
253
232
1,799

(11)
—
—
(1,075)

5
3
(23)
(197)

—
—
—
82

(46)
(3)
—
(24)

—
3
—
282

316
71
52
439

$ 1,359 $
227
354
1,440
3,380
(3,468)
378
89
176
643

(17) $
(18)
31
(58)
(62)
927
(11)
(4)
20
5

(4)
—
(9)
—

—
(17)
—
14

— $
765 $ (437) $
—
103
(68)
(20)
18
—
—
518
(721)
(20)
1,404 (1,226)
—
521
(653)

—
—
—
(1)

— $
—
—
7
7
—

(2)
—
—
57

(327) $ 1,218 $
—
112
(13)
26
(167)
771
(507)
2,127
293
(74)

(774)
(96)
(10)
(209)
(1,089)
(385)

(451) $
(166)
—
(263)
(880)
(208)

Change in
Unrealized
Gains
(Losses) in
Net Income
Related to
Financial
Instruments
Still Held (2)

2,384
145
518
1,552
4,599
(2,893)

(78)
(6)
56
(152)
(180)
259
—
1
—
1
14
(21)
19
213

(58)
(14)
(32)
(862)

1
2
(7)
(200)

2,110 $
190
396
1,527
4,223
(2,662)

(79)
(44)
34
(91)
(180)
800

(111)
(7)
—
(118)

—
8
—
8

(98)
(10)
—
(108)

—
—
—
—

(45)
(4)
(2)
(51)

304
—
—
304

(101)
(1)
(142)
(244)

316
71
52
439

8
—
(19)
(11)

—
59
132
26

(45)
(13)
(1)
(202)

—
70
—
144

(37)
(180)
(79)
(383)

101
46
26
9

(45)
(13)
(4)
(2)

242
748
317
1,572

10
65
18
3

—
138

(11)
(1,075)

—
(113)

267
717
236
1,970

1
62
13
7

—
—
(6)
3

(16)
(1,164)

6
(92)

—
13

—
(6)

—
15

(1)
(12)

—
98

—
(65)

Assets (liabilities). For assets, increase (decrease) to Level 3 and for liabilities, (increase) decrease to Level 3.
Includes gains (losses) reported in earnings in the following income statement line items: Trading account assets/liabilities - predominantly market making and similar activities; Net derivative
assets (liabilities) - market making and similar activities and other income; AFS debt securities - other income; Other debt securities carried at fair value - other income; Loans and leases - market
making and similar activities and other income; Loans held-for-sale - other income; Other assets - market making and similar activities and other income related to MSRs; Short-term borrowings market making and similar activities; Accrued expenses and other liabilities - market making and similar activities and other income; Long-term debt - market making and similar activities.
Includes unrealized gains (losses) in OCI on AFS debt securities, foreign currency translation adjustments and the impact of changes in the Corporation’s credit spreads on long-term debt
accounted for under the fair value option. Amounts include net unrealized gains (losses) of $28 million and $(19) million related to financial instruments still held at December 31, 2022 and
2021.
Net derivative assets (liabilities) include derivative assets of $3.2 billion and $3.1 billion and derivative liabilities of $6.1 billion and $5.8 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Amounts represent instruments that are accounted for under the fair value option.
Issuances represent loan originations and MSRs recognized following securitizations or whole-loan sales.
Settlements primarily represent the net change in fair value of the MSR asset due to the recognition of modeled cash flows and the passage of time.

Bank of America 2022 199

Level 3 – Fair Value Measurements (1)

(Dollars in millions)

Year Ended December 31, 2020
Trading account assets:
Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Equity securities
Non-U.S. sovereign debt
Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS
Total trading account assets
Net derivative assets (liabilities) (4)
AFS debt securities:
Non-agency residential MBS
Non-U.S. and other taxable securities
Tax-exempt securities
Total AFS debt securities
Other debt securities carried at fair value - Nonagency residential MBS
Loans and leases (5,6)
Loans held-for-sale (5,6)
Other assets (6,7)
Trading account liabilities – Equity securities
Trading account liabilities – Corporate securities
and other
Long-term debt (5)
(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Balance
January 1

Total
Realized/
Unrealized
Gains
(Losses) in
Net
Income (2)

$ 1,507 $
239
482
1,553
3,781

Gains
(Losses)
in OCI (3)

(138) $
(43)
45
(120)
(256)

Gross
Purchases

(1) $
—
(46)
(3)
(50)

Sales

Issuances

430 $ (242) $
78
(53)
76
(61)
577
(746)
1,161 (1,102)

Settlements

Gross
Transfers
into
Level 3

Gross
Transfers
out of
Level 3

Balance
December 31

Change in
Unrealized
Gains
(Losses) in
Net Income
Related to
Financial
Instruments
Still Held (2)

10 $
—
—
11
21

(282) $ 639 $ (564) $
(3)
58
(49)
(39)
150
(253)
(96)
757
(493)
(420)
1,604
(1,359)

1,359 $
227
354
1,440
3,380

(102)
(31)
47
(92)
(178)

(3,468)

(953)

(2,538)

(235)

—

120

(646)

—

(112)

(235)

178

424
67
108
599

(2)
1
(21)
(22)

3
—
3
6

23
9
—
32

(54)
(5)
—
(59)

—
—
—
—

(44)
(1)
(169)
(214)

158
18
265
441

(130)
—
(10)
(140)

378
89
176
643

(2)
1
(20)
(21)

299
693

26
(4)

—
—

—
145

(180)
(76)

—
22

(24)
(161)

190
98

(44)
—

267
717

3
9

375
2,360
(2)

26
(288)
1

(28)
3
—

—
178
—

(489)
(4)
—

691
224
—

(119)
(506)
—

93
5
—

(313)
(2)
1

236
1,970
—

(5)
(374)
—

(15)
(1,149)

8
(46)

—
2

(7)
(104)

(3)
—

—
(47)

1
218

—
(52)

—
14

(16)
(1,164)

—
(5)

Assets (liabilities). For assets, increase (decrease) to Level 3 and for liabilities, (increase) decrease to Level 3.
Includes gains/losses reported in earnings in the following income statement line items: Trading account assets/liabilities - predominantly market making and similar activities; Net derivative
assets (liabilities) - market making and similar activities and other income; AFS debt securities - other income; Other debt securities carried at fair value - other income; Loans and leases - market
making and similar activities and other income; Loans held-for-sale - other income; Other assets - market making and similar activities and other income related to MSRs; Long-term debt - market
making and similar activities.
Includes unrealized losses in OCI on AFS debt securities, foreign currency translation adjustments and the impact of changes in the Corporation’s credit spreads on long-term debt accounted for
under the fair value option. Amounts include net unrealized losses of $41 million related to financial instruments still held at December 31, 2020.
Net derivative assets (liabilities) include derivative assets of $2.8 billion and derivative liabilities of $6.2 billion.
Amounts represent instruments that are accounted for under the fair value option.
Issuances represent loan originations and MSRs recognized following securitizations or whole-loan sales.
Settlements primarily represent the net change in fair value of the MSR asset due to the recognition of modeled cash flows and the passage of time.

200 Bank of America 2022

The following tables present information about significant unobservable inputs related to the Corporation’s material categories of
Level 3 financial assets and liabilities at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Quantitative Information about Level 3 Fair Value Measurements at December 31, 2022
(Dollars in millions)

Inputs
Fair
Value

Financial Instrument
Loans and Securities

Valuation
Technique

Significant Unobservable
Inputs

Ranges of
Inputs

Weighted
Average (1)

(2)

Instruments backed by residential real estate assets

$

338

Loans and leases

137

AFS debt securities – Non-agency residential

258

Other debt securities carried at fair value – Non-agency residential

119

Instruments backed by commercial real estate assets

$

Trading account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other

66

Loans held-for-sale
Commercial loans, debt securities and other
Trading account assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt

Default rate

0% to 25%

10%

0% to 29% CPR

12% CPR

0% to 3% CDR

1% CDR

Price

$0 to $111

$26

Loss severity

0% to 100%

24%

Yield

0% to 25%

10%

Price

$0 to $100

$75

5% to 43%

15%

10% to 20%

15%

4,348

Yield

2,092

Prepayment speed

518

Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS

1,148

AFS debt securities – Tax-exempt securities

51

AFS debt securities – Non-U.S. and other taxable securities

195

Loans and leases

116

Loans held-for-sale

MSRs

Discounted cash
flow

Prepayment speed

4
$

Trading account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other

Other assets, primarily auction rate securities

Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables

362
292

Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS

Yield

852

Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS

Default rate

3% to 4%

4%

Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables

Loss severity

35% to 40%

38%

Price

$0 to $157

$75

Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables

Price

$10 to $97

$94

11%

n/a

Weighted-average life, fixed rate (5)

0 to 14 years

6 years

Weighted-average life, variable rate (5)

0 to 12 years

4 years

228
$

$

779

1,020
Discounted cash
flow

Discount rate

Option-adjusted spread, fixed rate

7% to 14%

9%

Option-adjusted spread, variable rate

9% to 15%

12%

22% to 43%

23%

0% to 95%

69%

$0 to $119

$90

Structured liabilities
Long-term debt

$

(862)

Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables,
Industry standard
derivative pricing (3)

Yield
Equity correlation
Price
Natural gas forward price

$3/MMBtu to $13/MMBtu $9 /MMBtu

Net derivative assets (liabilities)
Credit derivatives

$

(44)
Discounted cash
flow, Stochastic
recovery correlation
model

Credit spreads

3 to 63 bps

22 bps

Upfront points

0 to 100 points

83 points

15% CPR

n/a

Prepayment speed
Default rate
Credit correlation

2% CDR

n/a

18% to 53%

44%

Price

$0 to $151

$63

Equity derivatives

$

(1,534)

Industry standard
derivative pricing (3)

Equity correlation

0% to 100%

73%

4% to 101%

44%

Commodity derivatives

$

(291)

Discounted cash
flow, Industry
standard derivative
pricing (3)

Natural gas forward price

Interest rate derivatives

$

(1,024)
Industry standard
derivative pricing (4)

Total net derivative assets (liabilities)

$

Long-dated equity volatilities
Power forward price

$3/MMBtu to $13/MMBtu $8 /MMBtu
$9 to $123

$43

Correlation (IR/IR)

(35)% to 89%

67%

Correlation (FX/IR)

11% to 58%

43%

0% to 39%

1%

Long-dated inflation volatilities

0% to 5%

2%

Interest rate volatilities

0% to 2%

1%

Long-dated inflation rates

(2,893)

(1)

For loans and securities, structured liabilities and net derivative assets (liabilities), the weighted average is calculated based upon the absolute fair value of the instruments.
The categories are aggregated based upon product type which differs from financial statement classification. The following is a reconciliation to the line items in the table on page 197: Trading
account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other of $2.4 billion, Trading account assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt of $518 million, Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans,
MBS and ABS of $1.6 billion, AFS debt securities of $504 million, Other debt securities carried at fair value - Non-agency residential of $119 million, Other assets, including MSRs, of $1.8 billion,
Loans and leases of $253 million and LHFS of $232 million.
(3)
Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes.
(4)
Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation, Black-Scholes and other methods that model the joint dynamics of interest, inflation and foreign exchange rates.
(5)
The weighted-average life is a product of changes in market rates of interest, prepayment rates and other model and cash flow assumptions.
CPR = Constant Prepayment Rate
CDR = Constant Default Rate
MMBtu = Million British thermal units
IR = Interest Rate
FX = Foreign Exchange
n/a = not applicable
(2)

Bank of America 2022 201

Quantitative Information about Level 3 Fair Value Measurements at December 31, 2021
(Dollars in millions)

Inputs
Fair
Value

Financial Instrument

Valuation
Technique

Significant Unobservable
Inputs

Ranges of
Inputs

Weighted
Average (1)

Loans and Securities (2)
Instruments backed by residential real estate assets

$

Yield

1,269

0% to 25%

6%
19% CPR

0% to 3% CDR

1% CDR

338

Loans and leases

373

AFS debt securities - Non-agency residential

316

Other debt securities carried at fair value - Non-agency residential

242

Loss severity

298

Yield

0% to 25%

4%

138

Price

$0 to $101

$57

0% to 19%

10%

10% to 20%

16%

Instruments backed by commercial real estate assets

$

Trading account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other
Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS

77

AFS debt securities – Non-U.S. and other taxable securities

71

Loans held-for-sale
Commercial loans, debt securities and other
Trading account assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt

Price

4,212

Yield

1,972

Prepayment speed

396

Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS

1,112

AFS debt securities – Tax-exempt securities

52

Loans and leases

375

Loans held-for-sale

305

MSRs

Discounted cash
flow

Default rate

$0 to $168

$92

0% to 43%

13%

12
$

Trading account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other

Other assets, primarily auction rate securities

Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables

Prepayment speed

1% to 40% CPR

Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans, MBS and ABS

$

$

754

Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables

Default rate

3% to 4%

4%

Loss severity

35% to 40%

37%

Price

$0 to $189

$73

45%

n/a

$10 to $96

$91

9%

n/a

Weighted-average life, fixed rate (5)

0 to 14 years

4 years

Weighted-average life, variable rate (5)

0 to 10 years

3 years

Long-dated equity volatilities
Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables

818
Discounted cash
flow

Price
Discount rate

Option-adjusted spread, fixed rate

7% to 14%

9%

Option-adjusted spread, variable rate

9% to 15%

12%

Structured liabilities
Long-term debt

$

(1,075)

Discounted cash
flow, Market
comparables,
Industry standard
derivative pricing (3)

Yield
Equity correlation
Long-dated equity volatilities
Price
Natural gas forward price

0% to 19%

18%

3% to 100%

80%

5% to 78%

36%

$0 to $125

$82

$2/MMBtu to $8/MMBtu

$4/MMBtu

Net derivative assets (liabilities)
Credit derivatives

$

(104)
Discounted cash
flow, Stochastic
recovery correlation
model

Equity derivatives

$

(1,710)

Commodity derivatives

$

(976)

Interest rate derivatives

$

Industry standard
derivative pricing (3)
Discounted cash
flow, Industry
standard derivative
pricing (3)

128
Industry standard
derivative pricing (4)

Total net derivative assets (liabilities)
(1)

$

Credit spreads

7 to 155 bps

61 bps

Upfront points

16 to 100 points

68 points

15% CPR

n/a

Prepayment speed
Default rate
Credit correlation

2% CDR

n/a

20% to 60%

55%

Price

$0 to $120

$53

Equity correlation

3% to 100%

80%

Long-dated equity volatilities
Natural gas forward price
Correlation
Power forward price

5% to 78%

36%

$2/MMBtu to $8/MMBtu

$4/MMBtu

65% to 85%

76%

$11 to $103

$32

Volatilities

41% to 69%

63%

Correlation (IR/IR)

(1)% to 90%

54%

Correlation (FX/IR)

(1)% to 58%

44%

G(10)% to 11%

3%

Long-dated inflation volatilities

0% to 2%

2%

Interest rates volatilities

0% to 2%

1%

Long-dated inflation rates

(2,662)

For loans and securities, structured liabilities and net derivative assets (liabilities), the weighted average is calculated based upon the absolute fair value of the instruments.
The categories are aggregated based upon product type which differs from financial statement classification. The following is a reconciliation to the line items in the table on page 198: Trading
account assets – Corporate securities, trading loans and other of $2.1 billion, Trading account assets – Non-U.S. sovereign debt of $396 million, Trading account assets – Mortgage trading loans,
MBS and ABS of $1.5 billion, AFS debt securities of $439 million, Other debt securities carried at fair value - Non-agency residential of $242 million, Other assets, including MSRs, of $1.6 billion,
Loans and leases of $748 million and LHFS of $317 million.
(3)
Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes.
(4)
Includes models such as Monte Carlo simulation, Black-Scholes and other methods that model the joint dynamics of interest, inflation and foreign exchange rates.
(5)
The weighted-average life is a product of changes in market rates of interest, prepayment rates and other model and cash flow assumptions.
CPR = Constant Prepayment Rate
CDR = Constant Default Rate
MMBtu = Million British thermal units
IR = Interest Rate
FX = Foreign Exchange
n/a = not applicable
(2)

202 Bank of America 2022

In the previous tables, instruments backed by residential
and commercial real estate assets include RMBS, commercial
MBS, whole loans and mortgage CDOs. Commercial loans, debt
securities and other include corporate CLOs and CDOs,
commercial loans and bonds, and securities backed by non-real
estate assets. Structured liabilities primarily include equitylinked notes that are accounted for under the fair value option.
The Corporation uses multiple market approaches in valuing
certain of its Level 3 financial instruments. For example, market
comparables and discounted cash flows are used together. For
a given product, such as corporate debt securities, market
comparables may be used to estimate some of the
unobservable inputs, and then these inputs are incorporated
into a discounted cash flow model. Therefore, the balances
disclosed encompass both of these techniques.
The levels of aggregation and diversity within the products
disclosed in the tables result in certain ranges of inputs being
wide and unevenly distributed across asset and liability
categories.

Uncertainty of Fair Value Measurements from
Unobservable Inputs
Loans and Securities
A significant increase in market yields, default rates, loss
severities or duration would have resulted in a significantly lower
fair value for long positions. Short positions would have been
impacted in a directionally opposite way. The impact of changes
in prepayment speeds would have resulted in differing impacts
depending on the seniority of the instrument and, in the case of
CLOs, whether prepayments can be reinvested. A significant
increase in price would have resulted in a significantly higher
fair value for long positions, and short positions would have
been impacted in a directionally opposite way.

Structured Liabilities and Derivatives
For credit derivatives, a significant increase in market yield,
upfront points (i.e., a single upfront payment made by a

protection buyer at inception), credit spreads, default rates or
loss severities would have resulted in a significantly lower fair
value for protection sellers and higher fair value for protection
buyers. The impact of changes in prepayment speeds would
have resulted in differing impacts depending on the seniority of
the instrument.
Structured credit derivatives are impacted by credit
correlation. Default correlation is a parameter that describes the
degree of dependence among credit default rates within a credit
portfolio that underlies a credit derivative instrument. The
sensitivity of this input on the fair value varies depending on the
level of subordination of the tranche. For senior tranches that
are net purchases of protection, a significant increase in default
correlation would have resulted in a significantly higher fair
value. Net short protection positions would have been impacted
in a directionally opposite way.
For equity derivatives, commodity derivatives, interest rate
derivatives and structured liabilities, a significant change in
long-dated rates and volatilities and correlation inputs (i.e., the
degree of correlation between an equity security and an index,
between two different commodities, between two different
interest rates, or between interest rates and foreign exchange
rates) would have resulted in a significant impact to the fair
value; however, the magnitude and direction of the impact
depend on whether the Corporation is long or short the
exposure. For structured liabilities, a significant increase in yield
or decrease in price would have resulted in a significantly lower
fair value.

Nonrecurring Fair Value
The Corporation holds certain assets that are measured at fair
value only in certain situations (e.g., the impairment of an
asset), and these measurements are referred to herein as
nonrecurring. The amounts below represent assets still held as
of the reporting date for which a nonrecurring fair value
adjustment was recorded during 2022, 2021, and 2020.

Assets Measured at Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis

Assets
Loans held-for-sale
Loans and leases (1)
Foreclosed properties (2, 3)
Other assets

$

1,979
—
—
88

$

3,079
166
7
165

2022
Assets
Loans held-for-sale
Loans and leases (1)
Foreclosed properties
Other assets
(1)
(2)

(3)

December 31, 2021
Level 2
Level 3

December 31, 2022
Level 2
Level 3

(Dollars in millions)

$

(387)
(48)
(6)
(91)

$

634
—
—
256

$

Gains (Losses)
2021
$

(44)
(60)
(2)
(492)

24
213
5
2,046

2020
$

(79)
(73)
(6)
(98)

Includes $15 million, $24 million and $30 million of losses on loans that were written down to a collateral value of zero during 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Amounts are included in other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and represent the carrying value of foreclosed properties that were written down subsequent to their initial classification
as foreclosed properties. Losses on foreclosed properties include losses recorded during the first 90 days after transfer of a loan to foreclosed properties.
Excludes $60 million and $52 million of properties acquired upon foreclosure of certain government-guaranteed loans (principally FHA-insured loans) at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Bank of America 2022 203

The table below presents information about significant unobservable inputs utilized in the Corporation's nonrecurring Level 3 fair
value measurements at December 31, 2022 and 2021.

Quantitative Information about Nonrecurring Level 3 Fair Value Measurements
Inputs

Other assets (3)

Significant Unobservable
Inputs
Year Ended December 31, 2022
Implied yield
$ 3,079 Pricing model
166 Market comparables OREO discount
Costs to sell
165 Discounted cash flow Discount rate

Loans and leases (2)

$

Financial Instrument
(Dollars in millions)

Loans held-for-sale
Loans and leases (2)

Other assets (4)

Fair
Value

Valuation
Technique

Year Ended December 31, 2021
OREO discount
Costs to sell
1,875 Discounted cash flow Discount rate
166 Market comparables Estimated appraisal value
213 Market comparables

Ranges of
Inputs

Weighted
Average (1)

9% to 24%
10% to 66%
8% to 24%
7%

n/a
26%
9%
n/a

13% to 59%
8% to 26%
7%
n/a

24%
9%
n/a
n/a

(1)

The weighted average is calculated based upon the fair value of the loans.
Represents residential mortgages where the loan has been written down to the fair value of the underlying collateral.
Represents the fair value of certain impaired renewable energy investments.
(4)
Represents the fair value of certain impaired renewable energy investments and impaired assets related to the Corporation’s real estate rationalization.
n/a = not applicable
(2)
(3)

NOTE 21 Fair Value Option
Loans and Loan Commitments
The Corporation elects to account for certain loans and loan
commitments that exceed the Corporation’s single-name credit
risk concentration guidelines under the fair value option.
Lending commitments are actively managed and, as
appropriate, credit risk for these lending relationships may be
mitigated through the use of credit derivatives, with the
Corporation’s public side credit view and market perspectives
determining the size and timing of the hedging activity. These
credit derivatives do not meet the requirements for designation
as accounting hedges and are carried at fair value. The fair
value option allows the Corporation to carry these loans and
loan commitments at fair value, which is more consistent with
management’s view of the underlying economics and the
manner in which they are managed. In addition, the fair value
option allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting volatility
that would otherwise result from the asymmetry created by
accounting for the financial instruments at historical cost and
the credit derivatives at fair value.

Loans Held-for-sale
The Corporation elects to account for residential mortgage
LHFS, commercial mortgage LHFS and certain other LHFS under
the fair value option. These loans are actively managed and
monitored and, as appropriate, certain market risks of the loans
may be mitigated through the use of derivatives. The
Corporation has elected not to designate the derivatives as
qualifying accounting hedges, and therefore, they are carried at

204 Bank of America 2022

fair value. The changes in fair value of the loans are largely
offset by changes in the fair value of the derivatives. The fair
value option allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting
volatility that would otherwise result from the asymmetry created
by accounting for the financial instruments at the lower of cost
or fair value and the derivatives at fair value. The Corporation
has not elected to account for certain other LHFS under the fair
value option primarily because these loans are floating-rate
loans that are not hedged using derivative instruments.

Loans Reported as Trading Account Assets
The Corporation elects to account for certain loans that are held
for the purpose of trading and are risk-managed on a fair value
basis under the fair value option.

Other Assets
The Corporation elects to account for certain long-term fixed-rate
margin loans that are hedged with derivatives under the fair
value option. Election of the fair value option allows the
Corporation to reduce the accounting volatility that would
otherwise result from the asymmetry created by accounting for
the financial instruments at historical cost and the derivatives at
fair value.

Securities Financing Agreements
The Corporation elects to account for certain securities
financing agreements, including resale and repurchase
agreements, under the fair value option. These elections include
certain agreements collateralized by the U.S. government and
its agencies, which are generally short-dated and have minimal
interest rate risk.

Long-term Deposits
The Corporation elects to account for certain long-term fixed-rate
and rate-linked deposits that are hedged with derivatives that do
not qualify for hedge accounting. Election of the fair value option
allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting volatility that
would otherwise result from the asymmetry created by
accounting for the financial instruments at historical cost and
the derivatives at fair value. The Corporation has not elected to
carry other long-term deposits at fair value because they are not
hedged using derivatives.

volatility that would otherwise result from the asymmetry created
by accounting for the asset-backed secured financings at
historical cost and the corresponding mortgage LHFS securing
these financings at fair value.

Long-term Debt
The Corporation elects to account for certain long-term debt,
primarily structured liabilities, under the fair value option. This
long-term debt is either risk-managed on a fair value basis or
the related hedges do not qualify for hedge accounting.

Fair Value Option Elections

Short-term Borrowings
The Corporation elects to account for certain short-term
borrowings, primarily short-term structured liabilities, under the
fair value option because this debt is risk-managed on a fair
value basis.
The Corporation also elects to account for certain assetbacked secured financings, which are also classified in shortterm borrowings, under the fair value option. Election of the fair
value option allows the Corporation to reduce the accounting

The following tables provide information about the fair value
carrying amount and the contractual principal outstanding of
assets and liabilities accounted for under the fair value option
at December 31, 2022 and 2021, and information about where
changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities accounted for
under the fair value option are included in the Consolidated
Statement of Income for 2022, 2021 and 2020.

Fair Value Option Elections
December 31, 2021

December 31, 2022
Fair Value
Carrying
Amount

(Dollars in millions)

Federal funds sold and securities borrowed or
purchased under agreements to resell
Loans reported as trading account assets (1)
Trading inventory – other
Consumer and commercial loans
Loans held-for-sale (1)
Other assets
Long-term deposits
Federal funds purchased and securities loaned
or sold under agreements to repurchase
Short-term borrowings
Unfunded loan commitments
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Long-term debt

$

146,999
10,143
20,770
5,771
1,115
620
311
151,708
832
110
1,217
33,070

Contractual
Principal
Outstanding
$

147,158
17,682
n/a
5,897
1,873
n/a
381
151,885
833
n/a
1,161
36,830

Fair Value
Carrying
Amount Less
Unpaid Principal
$

(159)
(7,539)
n/a
(126)
(758)
n/a
(70)
(177)
(1)
n/a
56
(3,760)

Fair Value
Carrying
Amount
$

150,665
10,864
21,986
7,819
4,455
544
408
139,641
4,279
97
—
29,708

Contractual
Principal
Outstanding
$

150,677
18,895
n/a
7,888
5,343
n/a
401
139,682
4,127
n/a
—
30,903

Fair Value
Carrying
Amount Less
Unpaid Principal
$

(12)
(8,031)
n/a
(69)
(888)
n/a
7
(41)
152
n/a
—
(1,195)

(1)

A significant portion of the loans reported as trading account assets and LHFS are distressed loans that were purchased at a deep discount to par, and the remainder are loans with a fair value
near contractual principal outstanding.
n/a = not applicable

Bank of America 2022 205

Gains (Losses) Related to Assets and Liabilities Accounted for Under the Fair Value Option
Market making
and similar
activities

Other
Income
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Loans reported as trading account assets
Trading inventory – other (1)
Consumer and commercial loans
Loans held-for-sale (2)
Short-term borrowings
Unfunded loan commitments
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Long-term debt (3)
Other (4)
Total

$

$

(164)
(1,159)
(58)
—
639
—
11
4,359
74
3,702

$

Total
—
—
(27)
(304)
—
8
—
(46)
30
(339)

$

$

(164)
(1,159)
(85)
(304)
639
8
11
4,313
104
3,363

$

2021
Loans reported as trading account assets
Trading inventory – other (1)
Consumer and commercial loans
Loans held-for-sale (2)
Short-term borrowings
Long-term debt (3)
Other (4)
Total

$

Loans reported as trading account assets
Trading inventory – other (1)
Consumer and commercial loans
Loans held-for-sale (2)
Short-term borrowings
Unfunded loan commitments
Long-term debt (3)
Other (4)
Total

$

275
(211)
78
—
883
(604)
18
439

$

107
3,216
22
—
(170)
—
(2,175)
35
1,035

$

$

$

—
—
40
58
—
(41)
(23)
34

$

—
—
(3)
103
—
(65)
(53)
(22)
(40)

$

275
(211)
118
58
883
(645)
(5)
473

$

2020

(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)

$

$

107
3,216
19
103
(170)
(65)
(2,228)
13
995

$

The gains (losses) in market making and similar activities are primarily offset by (losses) gains on trading liabilities that hedge these assets.
Includes the value of IRLCs on funded loans, including those sold during the period.
The net gains (losses) in market making and similar activities relate to the embedded derivatives in structured liabilities and are typically offset by (losses) gains on derivatives and securities that
hedge these liabilities. For the cumulative impact of changes in the Corporation’s own credit spreads and the amount recognized in accumulated OCI, see Note 14 – Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income (Loss). For more information on how the Corporation’s own credit spread is determined, see Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements.
Includes gains (losses) on federal funds sold and securities borrowed or purchased under agreements to resell, other assets, long-term deposits and federal funds purchased and securities
loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase.

Gains (Losses) Related to Borrower-specific Credit Risk for Assets and Liabilities Accounted for Under the Fair Value
Option
Loans reported as trading account assets
Consumer and commercial loans
Loans held-for-sale
Unfunded loan commitments

NOTE 22 Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Financial instruments are classified within the fair value
hierarchy using the methodologies described in Note 20 – Fair
Value Measurements. Certain loans, deposits, long-term debt,
unfunded lending commitments and other financial instruments
are accounted for under the fair value option. For more
information, see Note 21 – Fair Value Option. The following
disclosures include financial instruments that are not carried at
fair value or only a portion of the ending balance is carried at
fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.

Short-term Financial Instruments
The carrying value of short-term financial instruments, including
cash and cash equivalents, certain time deposits placed and
other short-term investments, federal funds sold and purchased,
certain resale and repurchase agreements and short-term

206 Bank of America 2022

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

(950)
(51)
(23)
8

$

2020
128
7
28
(1)

$

(172)
(19)
(105)
(65)

borrowings, approximates the fair value of these instruments.
These financial instruments generally expose the Corporation to
limited credit risk and have no stated maturities or have shortterm maturities and carry interest rates that approximate
market. The Corporation accounts for certain resale and
repurchase agreements under the fair value option.
Under the fair value hierarchy, cash and cash equivalents
are classified as Level 1. Time deposits placed and other shortterm investments, such as U.S. government securities and
short-term commercial paper, are classified as Level 1 or Level
2. Federal funds sold and purchased are classified as Level 2.
Resale and repurchase agreements are classified as Level 2
because they are generally short-dated and/or variable-rate
instruments collateralized by U.S. government or agency
securities. Short-term borrowings are classified as Level 2.

Fair Value of Financial Instruments

Global Banking

The carrying values and fair values by fair value hierarchy of
certain financial instruments where only a portion of the ending
balance was carried at fair value at December 31, 2022 and
2021 are presented in the table below.

Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair Value
Carrying
Value

Level 2
Level 3
December 31, 2022

(Dollars in millions)

Financial assets
Loans
$ 1,014,593
Loans held-for-sale
6,871
Financial liabilities
Deposits (1)
1,930,341
Long-term debt
275,982
Commercial
unfunded lending
commitments (2)

$

Total

50,194
3,417

$ 935,282
3,455

$ 985,476
6,872

1,930,165
271,993

—
1,136

1,930,165
273,129

77

6,596

6,673

1,650

December 31, 2021
Financial assets
Loans
$
946,142
Loans held-for-sale
15,635
Financial liabilities
2,064,446
Deposits (1)
Long-term debt
280,117
Commercial
unfunded lending
commitments (2)
(1)

(2)

1,554

$

53,544
15,016

$ 919,980
627

$ 973,524
15,643

2,064,438
286,802

—
1,288

2,064,438
288,090

97

6,384

6,481

Includes demand deposits of $918.9 billion and $1.0 trillion with no stated maturities at
December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The carrying value of commercial unfunded lending commitments is included in accrued
expenses and other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The Corporation does not
estimate the fair value of consumer unfunded lending commitments because, in many
instances, the Corporation can reduce or cancel these commitments by providing notice to
the borrower. For more information on commitments, see Note 12 – Commitments and
Contingencies.

NOTE 23 Business Segment Information
The Corporation reports its results of operations through the
following four business segments: Consumer Banking, Global
Wealth & Investment Management, Global Banking and Global
Markets, with the remaining operations recorded in All Other.

Consumer Banking
Consumer Banking offers a diversified range of credit, banking
and investment products and services to consumers and small
businesses. Consumer Banking product offerings include
traditional savings accounts, money market savings accounts,
CDs and IRAs, checking accounts, and investment accounts and
products, as well as credit and debit cards, residential
mortgages and home equity loans, and direct and indirect loans
to consumers and small businesses in the U.S. Consumer
Banking includes the impact of servicing residential mortgages
and home equity loans.

Global Wealth & Investment Management
GWIM provides a high-touch client experience through a network
of financial advisors focused on clients with over $250,000 in
total investable assets, including tailored solutions to meet
clients’ needs through a full set of investment management,
brokerage, banking and retirement products. GWIM also
provides comprehensive wealth management solutions targeted
to high net worth and ultra high net worth clients, as well as
customized solutions to meet clients’ wealth structuring,
investment management, trust and banking needs, including
specialty asset management services.

Global Banking provides a wide range of lending-related products
and services, integrated working capital management and
treasury solutions, and underwriting and advisory services
through the Corporation’s network of offices and client
relationship teams. Global Banking also provides investment
banking products to clients. The economics of certain
investment banking and underwriting activities are shared
primarily between Global Banking and Global Markets under an
internal revenue-sharing arrangement. Global Banking clients
generally include middle-market companies, commercial real
estate firms, not-for-profit companies, large global corporations,
financial institutions, leasing clients, and mid-sized U.S.-based
businesses requiring customized and integrated financial advice
and solutions.

Global Markets
Global Markets offers sales and trading services and research
services to institutional clients across fixed-income, credit,
currency, commodity and equity businesses. Global Markets
provides market-making, financing, securities clearing,
settlement and custody services globally to institutional investor
clients in support of their investing and trading activities. Global
Markets product coverage includes securities and derivative
products in both the primary and secondary markets. Global
Markets also works with commercial and corporate clients to
provide risk management products. As a result of marketmaking activities, Global Markets may be required to manage
risk in a broad range of financial products. In addition, the
economics of certain investment banking and underwriting
activities are shared primarily between Global Markets and
Global Banking under an internal revenue-sharing arrangement.

All Other
All Other primarily consists of ALM activities, liquidating
businesses and certain expenses not otherwise allocated to a
business segment. ALM activities encompass interest rate and
foreign currency risk management activities for which
substantially all of the results are allocated to the business
segments.

Basis of Presentation
The management accounting and reporting process derives
segment and business results by utilizing allocation
methodologies for revenue and expense. The net income
derived for the businesses is dependent upon revenue and cost
allocations using an activity-based costing model, funds transfer
pricing, and other methodologies and assumptions management
believes are appropriate to reflect the results of the business.
Total revenue, net of interest expense, includes net interest
income on an FTE basis and noninterest income. The
adjustment of net interest income to an FTE basis results in a
corresponding increase in income tax expense. The segment
results also reflect certain revenue and expense methodologies
that are utilized to determine net income. The net interest
income of the businesses includes the results of a funds
transfer pricing process that matches assets and liabilities with
similar interest rate sensitivity and maturity characteristics. In
segments where the total of liabilities and equity exceeds
assets, which are generally deposit-taking segments, the
Corporation allocates assets to match liabilities. Net interest
income of the business segments also includes an allocation of
net interest income generated by certain of the Corporation’s
ALM activities.
The Corporation’s ALM activities include an overall interest
rate risk management strategy that incorporates the use of

Bank of America 2022 207

various derivatives and cash instruments to manage
fluctuations in earnings and capital that are caused by interest
rate volatility. The Corporation’s goal is to manage interest rate
sensitivity so that movements in interest rates do not
significantly adversely affect earnings and capital. The results of
a majority of the Corporation’s ALM activities are allocated to
the business segments and fluctuate based on the performance
of the ALM activities. ALM activities include external product
pricing decisions including deposit pricing strategies, the effects
of the Corporation’s internal funds transfer pricing process and
the net effects of other ALM activities.
Certain expenses not directly attributable to a specific
business segment are allocated to the segments. The costs of
certain centralized or shared functions are allocated based on
methodologies that reflect utilization.
Effective October 1, 2021, a business activity previously

included in the Global Markets segment is being reported as a
liquidating business in All Other, consistent with a realignment
in performance reporting to senior management. While this
activity was not material to Global Markets’ results of operations
and historical results have not been restated, this activity’s
noninterest expense of $309 million and $473 million for the
three months ended September 30, 2021 and June 30, 2021
was elevated and would have been excluded from Global
Markets’ results of operations for those periods under the new
basis of presentation.
The table below presents net income (loss) and the
components thereto (with net interest income on an FTE basis
for the business segments, All Other and the total Corporation)
for 2022, 2021 and 2020, and total assets at December 31,
2022, 2021 and 2020 for each business segment, as well as
All Other.

Results of Business Segments and All Other

Net interest income
Noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income
Year-end total assets

Total Corporation (1)
2021
2022
43,361 $
$
52,900 $
46,179
42,488
89,540
95,388
(4,594)
2,543
59,731
61,438
34,403
31,407
2,425
3,879
31,978 $
$
27,528 $
$ 3,051,375 $ 3,169,495

Net interest income
Noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income
Year-end total assets

Global Wealth & Investment Management
2021
2020
2022
5,664 $
5,468
$
7,466 $
13,116
15,084
14,282
20,748
18,584
21,748
(241)
357
66
15,258
14,160
15,490
5,731
4,067
6,192
1,404
996
1,517
4,327 $
3,071
$
4,675 $
438,275
$
368,893 $

At and for the year ended December 31
(Dollars in millions)

Net interest income
Noninterest income
Total revenue, net of interest expense
Provision for credit losses
Noninterest expense
Income (loss) before income taxes
Income tax expense (benefit)
Net income (loss)
Year-end total assets
(1)

There were no material intersegment revenues.

208 Bank of America 2022

$

$
$

2022
3,088
15,050
18,138
28
12,420
5,690
1,508
4,182
812,489

Global Markets
2021
$
4,011
15,244
19,255
65
13,032
6,158
1,601
$
4,557
$
747,794

$

$

2020
43,859
42,168
86,027
11,320
55,213
19,494
1,600
17,894

2020
4,646
14,119
18,765
251
11,417
7,097
1,845
5,252

2022
$
30,045
8,590
38,635
1,980
20,077
16,578
4,062
$
12,516
$ 1,126,453

$

$
$

Consumer Banking
2021
$
24,929 $
9,076
34,005
(1,035)
19,290
15,750
3,859
$
11,891 $
$ 1,131,142

2022
12,184
10,045
22,229
641
10,966
10,622
2,815
7,807
588,466

2022
$

$
$

117
(5,479)
(5,362)
(172)
2,485
(7,675)
(6,023)
(1,652)
155,074

Global Banking
2021
$
8,511
12,364
20,875
(3,201)
10,632
13,444
3,630
$
9,814
$
638,131
All Other
2021
$
246
(5,589)
(5,343)
(182)
1,519
(6,680)
(8,069)
$
1,389
$
214,153

$

$

2020
24,698
8,564
33,262
5,765
18,882
8,615
2,111
6,504

2020
9,013
9,974
18,987
4,897
9,342
4,748
1,282
3,466

2020
$

$

34
(3,605)
(3,571)
50
1,412
(5,033)
(4,634)
(399)

The tables below present noninterest income and the associated components for 2022, 2021 and 2020 for each business
segment, All Other and the total Corporation. For more information, see Note 2 – Net Interest Income and Noninterest Income.

Noninterest Income by Business Segment and All Other
Total Corporation
2021

2022
(Dollars in millions)
Fees and commissions:
Card income
Interchange fees
$
4,096
Other card income
1,987
Total card income
6,083
Service charges
Deposit-related fees
5,190
Lending-related fees
1,215
Total service charges
6,405
Investment and brokerage services
Asset management fees
12,152
Brokerage fees
3,749
Total investment and brokerage services
15,901
Investment banking fees
Underwriting income
1,970
Syndication fees
1,070
Financial advisory services
1,783
Total investment banking fees
4,823
Total fees and commissions
33,212
Market making and similar activities
12,075
Other income (loss)
(2,799)
Total noninterest income
$ 42,488

2022
Fees and commissions:
Card income
Interchange fees
$
767
Other card income
7
Total card income
774
Service charges
Deposit-related fees
2,310
Lending-related fees
983
Total service charges
3,293
Investment and brokerage services
Asset management fees
—
Brokerage fees
42
Total investment and brokerage services
42
Investment banking fees
Underwriting income
796
Syndication fees
565
Financial advisory services
1,643
Total investment banking fees
3,004
Total fees and commissions
7,113
Market making and similar activities
215
Other income (loss)
2,717
Total noninterest income
$ 10,045
(1)

$

4,560
1,658
6,218

$

2020

3,954
1,702
5,656

Global Wealth &
Investment Management
2021
2020
2022

Consumer Banking
2021
2020
2022

$

3,239
1,930
5,169

$

3,597
1,575
5,172

$

3,027
1,646
4,673

$

$

20
50
70

43
42
85

$

36
42
78

6,271
1,233
7,504

5,991
1,150
7,141

2,706
—
2,706

3,538
—
3,538

3,417
—
3,417

65
8
73

72
—
72

67
—
67

12,729
3,961
16,690

10,708
3,866
14,574

195
109
304

188
132
320

146
127
273

11,957
1,604
13,561

12,541
1,771
14,312

10,578
1,692
12,270

5,077
1,499
2,311
8,887
39,299
8,691
(1,811)
$ 46,179

4,698
861
1,621
7,180
34,551
8,355
(738)
$ 42,168

—
—
—
—
8,179
10
401
8,590

—
—
—
—
9,030
1
45
9,076

—
—
—
—
8,363
2
199
8,564

189
—
—
189
13,893
102
287
$ 14,282

388
—
—
388
14,857
40
187
$ 15,084

391
—
—
391
12,806
63
247
$ 13,116

2022

All Other (1)
2021

2020

Global Banking
2021

$

700
13
713

$

2020

$

499
14
513

2022

$

66
—
66

$

$

Global Markets
2021

$

220
—
220

2020

$

391
—
391

2,508
1,015
3,523

2,298
940
3,238

101
224
325

146
218
364

177
210
387

—
104
104

—
74
74

—
2,002
2,002

—
1,979
1,979

—
1,973
1,973

2,187
781
2,139
5,107
9,447
145
2,772
$ 12,364

2,070
482
1,458
4,010
7,835
103
2,036
9,974

$

1,176
505
139
1,820
4,213
11,406
(569)
$ 15,050

2,725
718
173
3,616
6,179
8,760
305
$ 15,244

2,449
379
163
2,991
5,742
8,471
(94)
$ 14,119

$

$

$

4
—
4

—
28
28

$

1
—
1

8
—
8

7
—
7

32
—
32

—
(8)
(8)

—
(25)
(25)

(16)
—
(16)

(191)
—
1
(190)
(186)
342
(5,635)
(5,479)

(223)
—
(1)
(224)
(214)
(255)
(5,120)
(5,589)

(212)
—
—
(212)
(195)
(284)
(3,126)
(3,605)

$

$

All Other includes eliminations of intercompany transactions.

Bank of America 2022 209

Business Segment Reconciliations
(Dollars in millions)

Segments’ total revenue, net of interest expense
Adjustments (1):
Asset and liability management activities
Liquidating businesses, eliminations and other
FTE basis adjustment
Consolidated revenue, net of interest expense
Segments’ total net income
Adjustments, net-of-tax (1):
Asset and liability management activities
Liquidating businesses, eliminations and other
Consolidated net income

$

2022
100,750

$

$

(164)
(5,198)
(438)
94,950
29,180
(122)
(1,530)
27,528

Segments’ total assets
Adjustments (1):
Asset and liability management activities, including securities portfolio
Elimination of segment asset allocations to match liabilities
Other
Consolidated total assets
(1)

$

2021
94,883
(4)
(5,339)
(427)
89,113
30,589

$

11
1,378
31,978

$

$

$

2020
89,598

$

375
(3,946)
(499)
85,528
18,293

$

279
(678)
17,894

$

December 31
2021
2022
2,955,342
2,896,301 $
1,133,375
(1,041,793)
63,492
3,051,375

1,363,626
(1,216,891)
67,418
3,169,495

$

Adjustments include consolidated income, expense and asset amounts not specifically allocated to individual business segments.

NOTE 24 Parent Company Information
The following tables present the Parent Company-only financial information.

Condensed Statement of Income
Income
Dividends from subsidiaries:
Bank holding companies and related subsidiaries
Interest from subsidiaries
Other income (loss)
Total income
Expense
Interest on borrowed funds from subsidiaries
Other interest expense
Noninterest expense
Total expense
Income before income taxes and equity in undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
Income tax expense
Income before equity in undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
Equity in undistributed earnings (losses) of subsidiaries:
Bank holding companies and related subsidiaries
Nonbank companies and related subsidiaries
Total equity in undistributed earnings (losses) of subsidiaries
Net income

210 Bank of America 2022

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

22,250
12,420
(201)
34,469

$

15,621
8,362
(114)
23,869

2020

$

10,352
8,825
(138)
19,039

236
7,041
1,322
8,599
25,870
683
25,187

54
3,383
1,531
4,968
18,901
886
18,015

136
4,119
1,651
5,906
13,133
649
12,484

2,333
8
2,341
27,528

14,078
(115)
13,963
31,978

5,372
38
5,410
17,894

$

$

Condensed Balance Sheet
December 31
2021
2022

(Dollars in millions)

Assets
Cash held at bank subsidiaries
Securities
Receivables from subsidiaries:
Bank holding companies and related subsidiaries
Banks and related subsidiaries
Nonbank companies and related subsidiaries
Investments in subsidiaries:
Bank holding companies and related subsidiaries
Nonbank companies and related subsidiaries
Other assets
Total assets
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Payables to subsidiaries:
Banks and related subsidiaries
Bank holding companies and related subsidiaries
Nonbank companies and related subsidiaries
Long-term debt
Total liabilities
Shareholders’ equity
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity

$

9,609
617

$

5,011
671

222,584
220
978

217,447
347
368

$

301,207
3,770
7,156
546,141

$

316,497
3,645
8,602
552,588

$

14,193

$

17,394

$

260
21
14,578
243,892
272,944
273,197
546,141

$

107
3
11,564
253,454
282,522
270,066
552,588

Condensed Statement of Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net income
Reconciliation of net income (loss) to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Equity in undistributed (earnings) losses of subsidiaries
Other operating activities, net
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
Investing activities
Net sales (purchases) of securities
Net payments to subsidiaries
Other investing activities, net
Net cash used in investing activities
Financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in other advances
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
Retirement of long-term debt
Proceeds from issuance of preferred stock and warrants
Redemption of preferred stock
Common stock repurchased
Cash dividends paid
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash held at bank subsidiaries
Cash held at bank subsidiaries at January 1
Cash held at bank subsidiaries at December 31

2021

2022

(Dollars in millions)

$

$

27,528

$

31,978

2020
$

17,894

(2,341)
(31,777)
(6,590)

(13,963)
(7,144)
10,871

(5,410)
14,303
26,787

25
(6,044)
(34)
(6,053)

(14)
(10,796)
(26)
(10,836)

(4)
(33,111)
(7)
(33,122)

2,853
44,123
(19,858)
4,426
(654)
(5,073)
(8,576)
17,241
4,598
5,011
9,609

503
56,106
(24,544)
2,170
(1,971)
(25,126)
(8,055)
(917)
(882)
5,893
5,011

(422)
43,766
(23,168)
2,181
(1,072)
(7,025)
(7,727)
6,533
198
5,695
5,893

$

$

Bank of America 2022 211

NOTE 25 Performance by Geographical Area
The Corporation’s operations are highly integrated with
operations in both U.S. and non-U.S. markets. The non-U.S.
business activities are largely conducted in Europe, the Middle
East and Africa and in Asia. The Corporation identifies its
geographic performance based on the business unit structure
used to manage the capital or expense deployed in the region

as applicable. This requires certain judgments related to the
allocation of revenue so that revenue can be appropriately
matched with the related capital or expense deployed in the
region. Certain asset, liability, income and expense amounts
have been allocated to arrive at total assets, total revenue, net
of interest expense, income before income taxes and net
income by geographic area as presented below.

(Dollars in millions)

U.S.

(3)

Asia

Europe, Middle East and Africa

Latin America and the Caribbean

Total Non-U.S.

Total Consolidated

(1)
(2)
(3)

2022
2021
2020
2022
2021
2020
2022
2021
2020
2022
2021
2020
2022
2021
2020
2022
2021
2020

Total assets include long-lived assets, which are primarily located in the U.S.
There were no material intercompany revenues between geographic regions for any of the periods presented.
Substantially reflects the U.S.

212 Bank of America 2022

Total Assets at
Year End (1)
$
2,631,815
2,789,862
127,399
117,085
262,856
233,356
29,305
29,192
419,560
379,633
$

3,051,375
3,169,495

Total Revenue,
Net of Interest
Expense (2)
$
82,890
78,012
75,576
4,597
4,439
4,232
6,044
5,423
4,491
1,419
1,239
1,229
12,060
11,101
9,952
$
94,950
89,113
85,528

Income Before
Income Taxes
$
28,135
31,392
18,247
1,144
988
1,051
1,121
1,097
(596)
569
499
293
2,834
2,584
748
$
30,969
33,976
18,995

Net Income
25,607
27,781
16,692
865
733
788
689
3,134
264
367
330
150
1,921
4,197
1,202
$
27,528
31,978
17,894

$

Glossary
Alt-A Mortgage – A type of U.S. mortgage that is considered
riskier than A-paper, or “prime,” and less risky than “subprime,”
the riskiest category. Typically, Alt-A mortgages are
characterized by borrowers with less than full documentation,
lower credit scores and higher LTVs.
Assets Under Management (AUM) – The total market value of
assets under the investment advisory and/or discretion of GWIM
which generate asset management fees based on a percentage
of the assets’ market values. AUM reflects assets that are
generally managed for institutional, high net worth and retail
clients, and are distributed through various investment products
including mutual funds, other commingled vehicles and separate
accounts.
Banking Book – All on- and off-balance sheet financial
instruments of the Corporation except for those positions that
are held for trading purposes.
Brokerage and Other Assets – Non-discretionary client assets
which are held in brokerage accounts or held for safekeeping.
Committed Credit Exposure – Any funded portion of a facility plus
the unfunded portion of a facility on which the lender is legally
bound to advance funds during a specified period under
prescribed conditions.

Macro Products – Include currencies, interest rates and
commodities products.
Margin Receivable – An extension of credit secured by eligible
securities in certain brokerage accounts.
Matched Book – Repurchase and resale agreements or
securities borrowed and loaned transactions where the overall
asset and liability position is similar in size and/or maturity.
Generally, these are entered into to accommodate customers
where the Corporation earns the interest rate spread.
Mortgage Servicing Rights (MSR) – The right to service a
mortgage loan when the underlying loan is sold or securitized.
Servicing includes collections for principal, interest and escrow
payments from borrowers and accounting for and remitting
principal and interest payments to investors.
Nonperforming Loans and Leases – Includes loans and leases
that have been placed on nonaccrual status, including
nonaccruing loans whose contractual terms have been
restructured in a manner that grants a concession to a borrower
experiencing financial difficulties.

Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA) – A portfolio adjustment
required to properly reflect the counterparty credit risk exposure
as part of the fair value of derivative instruments.

Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) – A framework established by the
U.S. banking regulators requiring banks to maintain certain
levels of regulatory capital ratios, comprised of five categories
of capitalization: “well capitalized,” “adequately capitalized,”
“undercapitalized,”
“significantly
undercapitalized”
and
“critically undercapitalized.” Insured depository institutions that
fail to meet certain of these capital levels are subject to
increasingly strict limits on their activities, including their ability
to make capital distributions, pay management compensation,
grow assets and take other actions.

Debit Valuation Adjustment (DVA) – A portfolio adjustment
required to properly reflect the Corporation’s own credit risk
exposure as part of the fair value of derivative instruments and/
or structured liabilities.

Subprime Loans – Although a standard industry definition for
subprime loans (including subprime mortgage loans) does not
exist, the Corporation defines subprime loans as specific
product offerings for higher risk borrowers.

Funding Valuation Adjustment (FVA) – A portfolio adjustment
required to include funding costs on uncollateralized derivatives
and derivatives where the Corporation is not permitted to use
the collateral it receives.

Troubled Debt Restructurings (TDRs) – Loans whose contractual
terms have been restructured in a manner that grants a
concession to a borrower experiencing financial difficulties.
Certain consumer loans for which a binding offer to restructure
has been extended are also classified as TDRs.

Credit Derivatives – Contractual agreements that provide
protection against a specified credit event on one or more
referenced obligations.

Interest Rate Lock Commitment (IRLC) – Commitment with a
loan applicant in which the loan terms are guaranteed for a
designated period of time subject to credit approval.
Letter of Credit – A document issued on behalf of a customer to
a third party promising to pay the third party upon presentation
of specified documents. A letter of credit effectively substitutes
the issuer’s credit for that of the customer.
Loan-to-value (LTV) – A commonly used credit quality metric. LTV
is calculated as the outstanding carrying value of the loan
divided by the estimated value of the property securing the loan.

Value-at-Risk (VaR) – VaR is a model that simulates the value of
a portfolio under a range of hypothetical scenarios in order to
generate a distribution of potential gains and losses. VaR
represents the loss the portfolio is expected to experience with
a given confidence level based on historical data. A VaR model
is an effective tool in estimating ranges of potential gains and
losses on our trading portfolios.

Bank of America 2022 213

Key Metrics
Active Digital Banking Users – Mobile and/or online active users
over the past 90 days.

Net Interest Yield – Net interest income divided by average total
interest-earning assets.

Active Mobile Banking Users – Mobile active users over the past
90 days.

Operating Margin – Income before income taxes divided by total
revenue, net of interest expense.

Book Value – Ending common shareholders’ equity divided by
ending common shares outstanding.

Return on Average Allocated Capital – Adjusted net income
divided by allocated capital.

Common Equity Ratio - Ending common shareholders’ equity
divided by ending total assets.

Return on Average Assets – Net income divided by total average
assets.

Deposit Spread – Annualized net interest income divided by
average deposits.

Return on Average Common Shareholders’ Equity – Net income
applicable to common shareholders divided by average common
shareholders’ equity.

Dividend Payout Ratio – Common dividends declared divided by
net income applicable to common shareholders.
Efficiency Ratio – Noninterest expense divided by total revenue,
net of interest expense.
Gross Interest Yield – Effective annual percentage rate divided by
average loans.

214 Bank of America 2022

Return on Average Shareholders’ Equity – Net income divided by
average shareholders’ equity.
Risk-adjusted Margin – Difference between total revenue, net of
interest expense, and net credit losses divided by average
loans.

Acronyms
ABS
AFS
AI
ALM
ARR
AUM
AVM
BANA
BHC
BofAS
BofASE
bps
CAE
CCAR
CDO
CDS
CECL
CET1
CFPB
CFTC
CLO
CLTV
CRO
CVA
DIF
DVA
ECL
EPS
ERC
ESG
EU
FCA
FDIC
FDICIA
FHA
FHLB
FHLMC
FICC
FICO
FLUs
FNMA
FTE
FVA
GAAP
GDPR
GLS

Asset-backed securities
Available-for-sale
Artificial intelligence
Asset and liability management
Alternative reference rates
Assets under management
Automated valuation model
Bank of America, National Association
Bank holding company
BofA Securities, Inc.
BofA Securities Europe SA
Basis points
Chief Audit Executive
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review
Collateralized debt obligation
Credit default swap
Current expected credit losses
Common equity tier 1
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Commodity Futures Trading Commission
Collateralized loan obligation
Combined loan-to-value
Chief Risk Officer
Credit valuation adjustment
Deposit Insurance Fund
Debit valuation adjustment
Expected credit losses
Earnings per common share
Enterprise Risk Committee
Environmental, social and governance
European Union
Financial Conduct Authority
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Improvement Act of 1991
Federal Housing Administration
Federal Home Loan Bank
Freddie Mac
Fixed income, currencies and commodities
Fair Isaac Corporation (credit score)
Front line units
Fannie Mae
Fully taxable-equivalent
Funding valuation adjustment
Accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America
General Data Protection Regulation
Global Liquidity Sources

GNMA
GRM
GSE
G-SIB
GWIM
HELOC
HQLA
HTM
IBOR
ICAAP
IRLC
ISDA
LCR
LHFS
LIBOR
LTV
MBS
MD&A
MLI
MLPCC
MLPF&S
MRC
MSA
MSR
NOL
NSFR
OCC
OCI
OREO
OTC
PCA
PPP
RMBS
RSU
RWA
SBA
SBLC
SCB
SEC
SLR
TDR
TLAC
UDAAP
VA
VaR
VIE

Government National Mortgage Association
Global Risk Management
Government-sponsored enterprise
Global systemically important bank
Global Wealth & Investment Management
Home equity line of credit
High Quality Liquid Assets
Held-to-maturity
Interbank Offered Rates
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process
Interest rate lock commitment
International Swaps and Derivatives Association,
Inc.
Liquidity Coverage Ratio
Loans held-for-sale
London Interbank Offered Rate
Loan-to-value
Mortgage-backed securities
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Merrill Lynch International
Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated
Management Risk Committee
Metropolitan Statistical Area
Mortgage servicing right
Net operating loss
Net Stable Funding Ratio
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
Other comprehensive income
Other real estate owned
Over-the-counter
Prompt Corrective Action
Paycheck Protection Program
Residential mortgage-backed securities
Restricted stock unit
Risk-weighted assets
Small Business Administration
Standby letter of credit
Stress capital buffer
Securities and Exchange Commission
Supplementary leverage ratio
Troubled debt restructurings
Total loss-absorbing capacity
Unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Value-at-Risk
Variable interest entity

Bank of America 2022 215

Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Bank of America Corporation and Subsidiaries
As of the end of the period covered by this report and pursuant to Rule 13a-15 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(Exchange Act), Bank of America’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, conducted an
evaluation of the effectiveness and design of our disclosure controls and procedures (as that term is defined in Rule 13a-15(e) of
the Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, Bank of America’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that
Bank of America’s disclosure controls and procedures were effective, as of the end of the period covered by this report.

216 Bank of America 2022

This page intentionally left blank.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 217

This page intentionally left blank.

218 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

This page intentionally left blank.

BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 219

miscellaneous & appendix

executive management team and management committee
Amy Littman
Co-Head of Global Compliance & Operational
Risk and Head of Enterprise Reputational Risk

EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT TEAM

Wendy H. Stewart
President, Global Commercial Banking

Brian T. Moynihan*
Chair of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer

Bruce R. Thompson*
Vice Chair, Head of Enterprise Credit

Raul A. Anaya
President, Business Banking

MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE**

Dean C. Athanasia*
President, Regional Banking

Faiz A. Ahmad
Head of Global Transaction Services

Denis Manelski
Global Head of Fixed Income Sales

Catherine P. Bessant
Vice Chair, Global Strategy

Michael C. Ankrom
Chief Resiliency Officer, Global Strategic
Enablement & Transformation

Anil T. Matai
Global Human Resources Executive and Life
Event Services

Keith T. Banks
Vice Chair and Chief Investment Officer,
Pension and Benefits Plan

E. Lee McEntire
Head of Investor Relations and Local Markets
Organization

Alexandre Bettamio
President, Latin America

Sharon L. Miller
President, Small Business and Head of
Specialty Banking & Lending

Aditya Bhasin*
Chief Technology and Information Officer
D. Steve Boland*
Chief Administrative Officer
Alastair M. Borthwick*
Chief Financial Officer
Sheri B. Bronstein*
Chief Human Resources Officer
James P. DeMare*
President, Global Markets
Paul M. Donofrio*
Vice Chair
Geoffrey S. Greener*
Chief Risk Officer
Christine P. Katziff
Chief Audit Executive
Kathleen A. Knox*
President, The Private Bank
Matthew M. Koder*
President, Global Corporate & Investment
Banking
Aron D. Levine
President, Preferred Banking
Bernard A. Mensah*
President, International; CEO,
Merrill Lynch International

Rudolf A. Bless
Chief Accounting Officer
Len Botkin
Enterprise Initiatives and Strategic Priorities
Cynthia H. Bowman
Chief Diversity, Inclusion and Corporate Social
Responsibility Officer
Candace Browning
Vice Chair of the Bank of America Institute
and Head of Global Research
Lisa G. Clyde
Head of Global Corporate Banking
& Leasing
Lawrence T. Di Rita
Head of Public Policy
Christopher J. Fabro
Global Compensation, Benefits and Aviation
Karen Fang
Global Head of Sustainable Finance
April L. Francois
Head of Global Strategic Planning

Lauren Mogensen*
Global General Counsel

Craig Froelich
Chief Information Security Officer

Thong M. Nguyen*
Vice Chair, Head of Global Strategy &
Enterprise Platforms

Sarang R. Gadkari
Co-Head of Global Capital Markets

Holly O’Neill
President, Retail Banking
Tom M. Scrivener*
Chief Operations Executive
Andrew M. Sieg*
President, Merrill Wealth Management

Debbie U. Helvig
Global Corporate Communications
Mary Hines Droesch
Head of Consumer & Small Business Products
Shannon Lilly
Treasurer

*Executive Officer
**All members of the Executive Management Team are also members of the Management Committee

220 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Andrei Magasiner
Global Markets Chief of Staff and Global
Banking and Global Markets AML Client
Outreach

Mark Monaco
Enterprise Payments
Tram V. Nguyen
Head of Global Strategic and Sustainable
Investments
Jessica A. Oppenheim
External Communications Executive
Lorna R. Sabbia
Head of Retirement and Personal Wealth
Solutions
Purna R. Saggurti
Vice Chair, Bank of America
April Schneider
Head of Wealth Management Banking &
Lending
Jiro Seguchi
Co-President of APAC and Head of APAC GCIB
Thomas J. Sheehan
Head of Global Investment Banking
Jin Su
Co-President of APAC and Co-Head of
APAC FICC
David C. Tyrie
Chief Digital Officer and Head of Global
Marketing
Elif Bilgi Zapparoli
Co-Head of Global Capital Markets
Soofian J. Zuberi
Head of Global Equities

board of directors
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Brian T. Moynihan
Chair of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer,
Bank of America Corporation
Lionel L. Nowell III
Lead Independent Director, Bank of America
Corporation; Former Senior Vice President
and Treasurer, PepsiCo, Inc.
Sharon L. Allen
Former Chairman, Deloitte LLP
José (Joe) E. Almeida
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Baxter International Inc.
Frank P. Bramble, Sr.
Former Executive Vice Chairman,
MBNA Corporation

Pierre J. P. de Weck
Former Chairman and Global Head
of Private Wealth Management,
Deutsche Bank AG
Arnold W. Donald
Former President and Chief Executive Officer,
Carnival Corporation and
Carnival plc
Linda P. Hudson
Former Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer,
The Cardea Group, LLC;
Former President and Chief Executive
Officer, BAE Systems, Inc.
Monica C. Lozano
Former Chief Executive Officer, College
Futures Foundation; Former Chairman,
US Hispanic Media Inc.

Denise L. Ramos
Former Chief Executive Officer and President,
ITT Inc.
Clayton S. Rose
President, Bowdoin College
Michael D. White
Former Chairman, President, and
Chief Executive Officer, DIRECTV; Lead
Director, Kimberly-Clark Corporation
Thomas D. Woods
Former Vice Chairman and Senior
Executive Vice President of CIBC
R. David Yost*
Former Chief Executive Officer,
AmerisourceBergen Corporation
Maria T. Zuber
Vice President for Research and
E.A. Griswold Professor of Geophysics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

*Not standing for reelection at the 2023 Annual Meeting of Shareholders
BANK OF AMERICA 2022

| 221

Corporate Information
miscellaneous & appendix

Bank of America Corporation

Headquarters

Annual Report on Form 10-K

The principal executive offices of Bank of America Corporation
(the Corporation) are located in the Bank of America Corporate
Center, 100 North Tryon Street, Charlotte, NC 28255.

The Corporation’s 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K is available
at https://investor.bankofamerica.com. The Corporation also
will provide a copy of the 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K
(without exhibits) upon written request addressed to:

Stock Listing

Bank of America Corporation
Office of the Corporate Secretary
Bank of America Corporate Center
100 North Tryon Street
NC1-007-56-06
Charlotte, NC 28255

The Corporation’s common stock is listed on the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol BAC. The
stock is typically listed as BankAm in newspapers. As of
December 31, 2022, there were 144,011 registered holders
of the Corporation’s common stock.

Investor Relations
Analysts, portfolio managers and other investors seeking
additional information about Bank of America stock should
contact our Equity Investor Relations group at 1.704.386.5681
or i_r@bofa.com. For additional information about Bank of
America from a credit perspective, including debt and preferred
securities, contact our Fixed Income Investor Relations
group at 1.866.607.1234 or fixedincomeir@bofa.com. Visit
the Investor Relations area of the Bank of America website,
https://investor.bankofamerica.com, for stock and dividend
information, financial news releases, links to Bank of America
SEC filings, electronic versions of our annual reports and
other items of interest to the Corporation’s shareholders.

Customers
For assistance with Bank of America products and services,
call 1.800.432.1000, or visit the Bank of America website
at www.bankofamerica.com. Additional toll-free numbers for
specific products and services are listed on our website at
www.bankofamerica.com/contact.

News Media
News media seeking information should visit our online
newsroom at https://newsroom.bankofamerica.com for news
releases, press kits and other items relating to the Corporation,
including a complete list of the Corporation’s media relations
specialists grouped by business specialty or geography.

222 | BANK OF AMERICA 2022

Shareholder Inquiries
For inquiries concerning dividend checks, electronic deposit
of dividends, dividend reinvestment, tax statements,
electronic delivery, transferring ownership, address changes
or lost or stolen stock certificates, contact Bank of America
Shareholder Services at Computershare Trust Company,
N.A., via the Internet at www.computershare.com/bac; call
1.800.642.9855; or write to P.O. Box 43078, Providence, RI
02940. Hearing impaired 1.888.403.9700 or outside the United
States 1.781.575.4592. For general shareholder information,
contact Bank of America Office of the Corporate Secretary at
1.800.521.3984. Shareholders outside of the United States and
Canada may call 1.781.575.2621.

Electronic Delivery
As part of our ongoing commitment to reduce paper
consumption, we offer electronic methods for customer
communications and transactions. Customers can sign up
to receive online statements through their Bank of America
or Merrill Lynch Wealth Management account website. In
2012, we adopted the SEC’s Notice and Access rule, which
allows certain issuers to inform shareholders of the electronic
availability of Proxy materials, including the Annual Report,
which significantly reduced the number of printed copies
we produce and mail to shareholders. Shareholders still
receiving printed copies can join our efforts by electing to
receive an electronic copy of the Annual Report and Proxy
materials. If you have an account maintained in your name at
Computershare Investor Services, you may sign up for this
service at www.computershare.com/bac. If your shares are
held by a broker, bank or other nominee, you may elect to
receive an electronic copy of the Proxy materials online at
www.proxyvote.com, or contact your broker.

Bank of America Corporation (“Bank of America”) is a financial holding
company that, through its subsidiaries and affiliated companies, provides
banking and non-banking financial services.
“Bank of America” and “BofA Securities” are the marketing names used by the Global Banking and Global Markets
divisions of Bank of America Corporation. Lending, other commercial banking activities, and trading in certain
financial instruments are performed globally by banking affiliates of Bank of America Corporation, including
Bank of America, N.A., Member FDIC. Trading in securities and financial instruments, and strategic advisory, and
other investment banking activities, are performed globally by investment banking affiliates of Bank of America
Corporation (“Investment Banking Affiliates”), including, in the United States, BofA Securities, Inc. and Merrill
Lynch Professional Clearing Corp., both of which are registered broker-dealers and Members of SIPC, and, in other
jurisdictions, by locally registered entities. BofA Securities, Inc. and Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. are
registered as futures commission merchants with the CFTC and are members of the NFA.
“Bank of America” is a marketing name for the Retirement Services business of Bank of America Corporation
(“BofA Corp.”). Banking activities may be performed by wholly owned banking affiliates of BofA Corp., including
Bank of America, N.A., member FDIC.

Design by Addison www.addison.com Photographs, page 1: ZimZoom LLC, page 33: Bank of America Chicago Marathon/Kevin Morris

Banking products are provided by Bank of America, N.A., and affiliated banks, Members FDIC, and wholly owned
subsidiaries of BofA Corp.
Bank of America Private Bank is a division of Bank of America, N.A., Member FDIC, and a wholly owned subsidiary
of Bank of America Corporation.
Investing involves risk. Past performance does not guarantee future results. Bank of America, Merrill, their
affiliates, and advisors do not provide legal, tax, or accounting advice. Clients should consult their legal and/or tax
advisors before making any financial decisions.
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated (also referred to as “MLPF&S” or “Merrill”) makes available
certain investment products sponsored, managed, distributed or provided by companies that are affiliates of
Bank of America Corporation (“BofA Corp.”). MLPF&S is a registered broker-dealer, registered investment adviser,
Member SIPC, and a wholly owned subsidiary of BofA Corp.
BofA Global Research is research produced by BofA Securities, Inc. (“BofAS”) and/or one or more of its affiliates.
BofAS is a registered broker-dealer, Member SIPC, and wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation.
The ranking or ratings shown herein may not be representative of all client experiences because they reflect an
average or sampling of the client experiences. These rankings or ratings are not indicative of any future performance
or investment outcome. More information can be found at https://newsroom.bankofamerica.com/awards.
Impact investing and/or Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) managers may take into consideration factors
beyond traditional financial information to select securities, which could result in relative investment performance
deviating from other strategies or broad market benchmarks, depending on whether such sectors or investments
are in or out of favor in the market.

Investment products:
Are Not FDIC Insured

May Lose Value

Are Not Bank Guaranteed

© 2023 Bank of America Corporation. All rights reserved.
Printed on 10% recovered fiber content. By using this paper, Bank of America is helping to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and water consumption. Leaf icon is a registered trademark of Bank of America Corporation.

BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION | 2022 ANNUAL REPORT

© 2023 Bank of America Corporation
00-04-1381B
2022 BAC Annual Report

